The following is a conversation all
about the state of the art in artificial
intelligence, including some of the
exciting technical breakthroughs and
developments in AI that happened over
the past year, and some of the
interesting things we think might happen
this upcoming year.
At times, it does get super technical,
but we do try to make sure that it
remains accessible to folks outside the
field without ever dumbing it down.
It is a great honor and pleasure to be
able to do this kind of episode with two
of my favorite people in the AI
community, Sebastian Raschka and Nathan
Lambert.
They are both widely respected machine
learning researchers and engineers who
also happen to be great communicators,
educators, writers, and
Twitterers, X posters.
Sebastian is the author of two books I
highly recommend for beginners and
experts alike. First is build a large
language model from scratch and build a
reasoning model from scratch.
I truly believe in the machine learning
computer science world, the best way to
learn and understand something is to
build it yourself
from scratch.
Nathan is the post-training lead at the
Allen Institute for AI and author of the
definitive book on reinforcement
learning from human feedback.
Both of them have great X accounts,
great Substack.
Sebastian has courses on YouTube, Nathan
has a podcast, and everyone should
absolutely follow all of those.
This is the Lex Fridman podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description, where you
can also find links to contact me, ask
questions, get feedback, and so on. And
now, dear friends, here's Sebastian
Raschka and Nathan Lambert.
So, I think one useful lens to look at
all of this through is the DeepSeek,
so-called DeepSeek moment. This happened
about a year ago in January 2025
when the open-weight Chinese company
DeepSeek released DeepSeek R1
that I think it's fair to say surprised
everyone with uh
near or at state-of-the-art performance
with allegedly much less compute for
much cheaper. And from then to today,
the AI competition has gotten insane
both on the research level and the
product level. It's just been
accelerating. Let's discuss all of this
today and maybe let's start with some
spicy questions if we can.
Uh who's winning at the international
level? Would you say it's a set of
companies in China or the set of
companies in the United States? And
Sebastian, Nathan, it's good to see you
guys.
Uh so, Sebastian, who do you think is
winning?
>> Um so, winning is a very broad uh you
know, term. I I would say you mentioned
the DeepSeek moment and I do think
DeepSeek is definitely winning the
hearts of the people who work on
open-weight models because they share
these as open models.
Um winning, I think, has multiple time
scales to it. We have today, we have
next year, we have in 10 years. One
thing I know for sure is that um I don't
think nowadays, 2026, that there will be
any company who is, let's say, having
access to a technology that no other
company has access to. And that is
mainly because researchers are
frequently changing jobs, changing labs.
They rotate. So, I don't think there
will be a clear winner in terms of
technology access. However, I do think
there will be
uh the differentiating factor will be
budget and hardware constraints. So, I
don't think the ideas will be
proprietary, but the way or the
resources that are needed to implement
them. And so, I don't see currently uh
take it all scenario where a winner
takes it all. I can't see that at the
moment.
>> Uh Nathan, what do you think?
>> You see the labs put different energy
into what they're trying to do. And I
think to demarcate the point in time
when we're recording this, um the hype
over Anthropic's Claude Opus 4.5 model
has been absolutely insane, which is
just I mean, I've used it and built
stuff in the last few weeks, and it's
it's almost gotten to the point where it
feels like a bit of a meme in terms of
the hype, and it's
kind of funny because this is very
organic. And then, if we go back a few
months ago, we can get the release date
in the notes as Gemini 3 from Google got
released, and it seemed like the
marketing and just like wow factor of
that release was super high. But then,
at the end of November, Claude Opus 4.5
was released, and the hype has been
growing. But Gemini 3 was before this,
and it kind of feels like people don't
really talk about it as much, even
though when it came out, everybody was
like, "This is
um Gemini's moment to retake kind of
Google's structural advantages in AI."
And Gemini 3 is a fantastic model, and I
still use it. It's just kind of
differentiation is lower.
And
I agree with Sebastian what you're
saying with all of these like the idea
space is very fluid, but um culturally,
Anthropic is known for betting very hard
on code, which is Claude code thing is
working out for them right now. So, I
think that even if the ideas flow pretty
freely, so much of this is bottlenecked
by human effort and kind culture of
organizations where Anthropic seems to
at least be presenting as the least
chaotic. It's is a bit of an advantage,
and if they can keep doing that for a
while,
but on the other side of things, there's
a lot of ominous technology from China
where there's way many more labs than
Deep Seek. So,
Deep Seek kicked off a movement within
China. I say kind of similar to how
ChatGPT kicked off a movement in the US
where everything had a chatbot. There's
now
tons of tech companies in China that are
releasing very strong frontier open
weight models to the point where I would
say that Deep Seek is kind of losing its
crown as the preeminent open model maker
in China and the likes of um Z.ai's with
their GLM models, MiniMax's models, um
Kimmy Moonshot, especially in the last
few months have shown more brightly. The
new Deep Seek models are still very
strong, but that's kind of a it could
look back as a big narrative point where
in 2025 Deep Seek came and then all and
it kind of provided this platform for
way more Chinese companies that are
releasing these fantastic models to kind
of have this new type of operation. So,
these models from these Chinese
companies are open weights and depending
on this trajectory of business models
that these American companies are doing
could be at risk, but currently
a lot of people are paying for AI
software in the US and historically in
China and other parts of the world
people don't pay a lot for software.
>> So, some of these models like Deep Seek
have the love of the people because they
are open weight. Uh how long do you
think the Chinese companies keep
releasing open weights models?
>> I would say for a few years. I think
that like in the US there's not a clear
business model for it. I have been
writing about open models for a while
and these Chinese companies have
realized it, so I get inbound from some
of them. And they're smart and realize
the same constraints, which is that a
lot of US
tech companies and other IT companies
won't pay for a API subscription to
Chinese companies for security concerns.
This has been a long-standing
um habit in tech and the people at these
companies then see open weight models as
an ability to influence and take part of
a huge growing AI expenditure market in
the US and they're very realistic about
this. And it's working for them and I
think that the government will see that
that is
building a lot of influence
internationally in terms of uptake of
the technology. So, there's going to be
a lot of incentives to keep it going,
but building these models and doing the
research is very expensive, so at some
point I expect consolidation, but I
don't expect that to be a story of 2026
where there will be
more open model builders throughout 2026
than there were in 2025 and a lot of the
notable ones will be in China.
>> You were going to say something?
>> Um yes, you mentioned DeepSeek losing
its crown. I do think to some extent
yes, but
we also have to consider though they are
still, I would say, slightly ahead and
the other ones. It's not that DeepSeek
got worse, it's just like the other ones
are using the ideas from DeepSeek. For
example, you mentioned Kimi. Same
architecture, they're training it and
then again we have this leapfrogging
where they might be at some point in
time a bit better because they have the
more recent model. And I think this
comes back to the fact that there won't
be a clear winner. It's will It will be
just be like like that. One person
releases something, the other one comes
in and the recent the most recent model
is probably always the best model.
>> Yeah, we'll also see that Chinese
companies have different incentives. So
like DeepSeek is very secretive where
some of these startups
are like the MiniMaxes and the Zidong
AIs of the world. Those two literally
have filed IPO paperwork and they're
trying to get Western mind share and do
a lot of outreach there. So I don't know
if these incentives will kind of change
the model development cuz DeepSeek
famously is built by a hedge fund,
HighFlyer Capital, and we don't know
exactly what they We don't know what
they use the models for or if they care
about this.
>> They're secretive in terms of
communication, they're not secretive in
terms of the technical reports that
describe how their models work. They're
still open on that front. And we should
also say on the Opus 4 5 hype there's
the layer of uh something
being the darling of the X echo chamber
on Twitter echo chamber and the actual
amount of people that are using the
model.
I think it's probably fair to say that
ChatGPT and Gemini are focused on the
broad user base
that just want to solve problems in
their daily lives and that user base is
gigantic.
So the hype about the coding may not be
represented in the actual use.
>> I would say also, um, a lot of the usage
patterns are, like you said, name
recognition, brand,
uh, and and stuff, but also muscle
memory almost where, um,
you know, like ChatGPT has been around
for a long time. People just got used to
using it and it's kind of like almost
like a flywheel. They recommend it to
other users and that stuff. The one
interesting point is also the
customization of LLMs. For example,
ChatGPT has a memory feature, right? And
so, you may have a subscription and you
use it for personal stuff, but I don't
know if you want to use that same thing
at work, you know, because it's a
boundary between private and work. If
you're working at a company, they might
not allow that or you may not want that.
And I think that's also an interesting
point where you might have multiple
subscriptions. One One is just clean
code. It keeps has nothing of your
personal images that you or hobby
projects in there. It's just like the
work thing. And then the other one is
your personal thing. So, I think that's
also something where two different use
cases and it doesn't mean you only have
to have one. It's It's I think the
future is also multiple ones.
>> What model do you think will win 2025?
And what model do you think is going to
win 2026?
>> I think in the context of a consumer
chatbots, it's a question of are you
willing to bet on Gemini
over ChatGPT, which I would say in my
gut feels like a bit of a risky bet
because OpenAI has been the incumbent
and there's so many benefits to that in
tech.
I I think the
momentum it feels like in 2025 was on
Gemini's side, but they were starting
from such a low point. I mean, um, RIP
Bard and these earlier attempts
of getting started. I think
huge credit for them for powering
through the organizational chaos to make
that happen.
But also, it's hard to bet against
OpenAI because they always come off cast
as so chaotic, but they're very good at
landing things. And I think like
personally, I have very mixed reviews of
GPT-5, but it had to have saved them so
much money
with the headline feature being a router
where most users are no longer charging
like charging their GPU costs as much.
So, I think it's very hard to dissociate
the things that I like out of models
versus the things that are going to
actually
be a general public
differentiator.
>> What do you think about 2026? Who's
going to win?
>> I'll say something even though it's
risky. I will say that I think Gemini
will continue to take progress on
ChatGPT. I think Google scale when both
of these are operating at such extreme
scales and like Google has the ability
to separate that research and product a
bit better where you hear so much about
OpenAI being chaotic operationally and
chasing the high-impact thing, which is
a very startup culture. And then on the
software and enterprise side, I think
Anthropic will have continued to success
as they've
again and again been set up for that.
And obviously Google's Cloud has a a lot
of offerings, but I think this kind of
like Gemini name brand is important for
them to build. And and Google's Cloud
will continue to do well, but that's
kind of a more complex thing to explain
in the ecosystem because that's
competing with the likes of Azure and
AWS rather than on the model provider
side.
>> So, in the infrastructure, you think
TPUs give an advantage?
>> Largely because the margin on Nvidia
chips is insane and Google can develop
everything from top to bottom to fit
their stack and not have to pay
this margin and they've had a head start
in building data centers. So, all of
these things that have both high lead
times and very hard margins on high
costs, Google has a just kind of a
historical advantage there. And if
there's going to be a new paradigm, it's
most likely to come from OpenAI where
they're kind of their research division
again and again has kind of shown
this ability to land a new research idea
or a product. I think like deep
research, Sora,
01 thinking models, like all these
definitional things have come from
OpenAI and that's got to be one of their
top
traits as an organization. So, it's kind
of hard to bet against that, but I think
a lot of this year will be about scale
and optimizing what could be described
as low-hanging fruit in models.
>> And clearly, there's a trade-off between
intelligence and speed. This is what
ChatGPT 5 was trying to solve behind the
scenes. It's like, do people actually
want intelligence, the broad public, or
do they want speed?
>> I think it's a nice variety, actually,
or the option to have a toggle there. I
mean, first for my personal usage, most
of the time when I look something up, I
use ChatGPT to ask a quick question, get
the information I want it fast. For, you
know, most daily tasks, I use the quick
model. Nowadays, I think the auto mode
is pretty good where you don't have to
specifically say thinking or, you know,
non-thinking and stuff. Then again, I
also sometimes want the pro mode. Very
often, what I do is when I have
something written, I put it into a
ChatGPT and say, "Hey, do a very
thorough check. Is are all my references
correct? Are all my thoughts correct? Uh
did I make any formatting mistakes? And
are the figure numbers wrong or
something like that?" And I don't need
that right away. It's something, okay, I
finish my stuff, maybe have dinner, let
it run, come back, and go through this.
And I think see, this is where I think
it's important to have this option. I
would go crazy if for each query I would
have to wait 30 minutes or 10 minutes
even.
>> That's me. Yeah.
Um I'm like saying over here I'm losing
my mind that you use the router and the
non-thinking model. I'm like, "How are
you How do you live with How do you live
with that?" Yeah, that's my reaction.
I'm
bent heavily on ChatGPT for a while.
Um
never touched five non-thinking. I find
it its tone and then its propensity of
errors it's just like it has a higher
likelihood of errors. Some of this is
from back when OpenAI released 03, which
was the first model to do this deep
search and find many sources and
integrate them for you. So, I became
habituated with that, so I will only use
GPT 5.2 thinking or pro when I'm finding
any sort of information query for work,
whether that's a paper or some code
reference that I found. And it's just
like I will regularly have like five Pro
queries going simultaneously, each
looking for one specific paper or
feedback on an equation or something.
>> I have a funny example of where I just
needed to answer as fast as possible for
this podcast before. I was going on a
trip. I have a local GPU running at home
and I wanted to run a long
RL experiment. And usually I also unplug
things because you never know if you're
not at home you don't want to have
things plugged in. And I accidentally
unplugged the GPU. It was like my wife
was already in the car and I was like,
"Oh dang." And then basically I wanted
as fast as possible a bash script that
runs my different experiments and the
evaluation. And I did something I know I
learned how to use bash
interface bash terminal, but in that
moment I just needed like 10 seconds
give me the command. It's a hilarious
situation.
>> Yeah, so what did you use?
>> So I did the non-thinking fastest model.
It gave me the bash command I to chain
different
scripts to each other and then the thing
is like you have that T thing where you
want to route this to a log file.
Top of my head I was just like in a
hurry. I could have thought about it
myself.
>> By the way, I don't know if there's a
representative case wife waiting in the
car you have to run you unplug the GPU.
You have to generate a bash script. This
sounds like a movie like Mission
Impossible.
>> I use Gemini for that. So I use thinking
for all the information stuff and then
Gemini for fast things or stuff that I
could sometimes Google which is like
it's good at explaining things and I
trust that it has this kind of
background of knowledge and it's simple.
And the Gemini app has got a lot better
and it's good for that sort of things.
And then for code and any sort of
philosophical discussion I use Claude
Opus 4.5. Also always with extended
thinking. Extended thinking and
inference time scaling is just a way to
make the models
um marginally smarter and I will always
edge on that side when the progress is
very high because you don't know when
that will unlock a new use case. And
then sometimes use Grok for
real-time information or finding
something on AI Twitter that I knew I
saw and I need to dig up and I'm just
fixated on. Although when Grok 4 came
out, the Grok 4, what is super heavy,
which was like their pro variant, was
actually very good and I was pretty
impressed with it. And then I just kind
of like muscle memory lost track of it
with having the ChatGPT app open. So, I
just wanted to thank you. Thanks.
>> Yeah. I actually do use Grok 4 heavy for
debugging.
For like hardcore debugging that the
other ones can't solve. I find that it's
the best at. And I It's interesting cuz
you said ChatGPT is the best interface.
Uh for me, for that same reason, but
this could be just momentum, Gemini
is the better interface for me. I think
because I fell in love with their
best needle in the haystack. If I ever
put something that has a lot of context,
but I'm looking for a very specific
kinds of information, make sure it
tracks all of it. I find at least that
Gemini for me has been uh the best. So,
it's funny with some of these models, if
they win your heart over for one
particular feature at one on a one
particular day, for that particular
query, that prompt, you're like, this
model is better. And so, you'll just
stick with it for a bit until it does
something really dumb. There's like a
threshold effect. Some smart thing and
then you fall in love with it and then
it does some dumb thing and you're like,
you know what? I'm going to switch and
try Claude and ChatGPT and all that kind
of stuff.
>> This is exactly like you use it until it
breaks, until you have a problem, and
then then you change the LM. And I think
it's the same how we use anything, like
our favorite text editor, operating
systems, or the browser. I mean, there
are so many browser options, Safari,
Firefox, Chrome, all the relatively
similar, but then there are edge cases,
maybe extensions you want to use, and
you switch. But, I don't think there is
any
one who types the same thing like the
website into different browsers and
compares them. You only do that when the
website doesn't render, if something
breaks, I think. So, that's That's a
good point. I think you use it until it
breaks, and then you explore other
options, I think.
>> On the long context thing, I was also a
Gemini user for this. But, the GPT-5.2
release blog had like crazy long context
scores, where a lot of people were like,
"Did they just figure out some
algorithmic change?" It went from like
30% to like 70% or something in this
minor model update. So, it's also very
hard to keep track of all of these
things. But, now I'm
look more favorably at GPT-5.2's long
context. So, it's just kind of like
how do I actually get to testing this?
It's
never-ending battle.
>> Well, it's interesting that none of us
talked about the Chinese models from a
user usage perspective. What does that
say? Does that mean the Chinese models
are not as good, or does that mean we're
just very biased and US-focused?
>> I do think that that's currently the
discrepancy between just the model and
the platform. So, I I think the open
models, they are more known for the open
weights, not their platform yet.
>> There are also a lot of companies that
are willing to sell you the open model
inference at a very low cost. I think
like open router, it's easy to do the
look at multi-model things. You could
run deep seek on perplexity. I think all
of us sitting here are like, "We use
OpenAI GPT-5 Pro very consistently.
We're all willing to pay for the
marginal intelligence gain." And anyone
that's like the these models from the US
are better in in terms of the outputs. I
think that the question is,
will they stay better for this year and
for years going? But, it's like so long
as they're better, I'm going to pay for
it to use them. I think
there's also analysis that shows that
like the
way that the Chinese models are served,
this you could argue due to export
controls or not, is that they use fewer
GPUs for replica, which makes them
slower and have different errors. and
it's like the speed and intelligence. If
these things are in your favor as a
user, I think in the US a lot of users
will go for this, and I think that that
is going to be a thing that will
spur these Chinese companies to want to
compete in other ways, whether it's like
sub- free or substantially lower costs,
or it'll breed creativity in terms of
offerings, which is good for the
ecosystem. But, I just think the simple
thing is the US models are currently
better, and we use them. And I tried
Chinese mo- I tried these other open
models, and I'm like, fun, but not going
to I don't go back to it.
>> Uh we didn't really mention programming.
That's another use case that a lot of
people deeply care about. So, I use
basically half and half cursor and
Claude code, because there I find them
to be like fundamentally different
experience and both useful. Uh what do
you guys You program quite a bit, so
what what do you use? What's the current
vibe?
>> So, I use the Codex plugin for VS Code.
Uh you know, it's very convenient. It's
just like a plugin, and then it's a chat
interface that has access to your
repository.
I know that Claude code is I think a bit
different. It is a bit more agentic. It
touches more things. It does a whole
project for you. I'm not quite there yet
where I'm comfortable with that, because
uh maybe I'm a control freak, but I
still would like to see a bit what's
going on. And Codex is kind of like
right now for me like the sweet spot
where it is helping me, but it is not
taking completely over.
>> I should mention one of the reasons I do
use Claude code is to build the skill of
programming with English. I mean, the
experience is fundamentally different.
You're
as opposed to micromanaging the details
of the process of the generation of the
code and
uh looking at the diff, which you can in
cursor, if that's the IDE you use, and
and then changing, altering,
looking and reading the code and
understanding the code deeply as you
progress, versus
just kind of like thinking in this
design space, and just guiding it at
this uh macro level which I think
is another way of thinking about the
programming process. Also, we should say
that Claude Code it just seems to be
somehow a better utilization of Claude
Opus 45.
>> It's a good side by side for people to
do. So, you can have Claude Code open,
you can have Cursor open, and you can
have VS Code open, and you can select
the same models on all of them and ask
questions. They're very interesting.
Like
with Claude Code, it works better in
that domain. It's remarkable.
>> All right, we should say that both of
you are legit on multiple fronts:
researchers, programmers, educators,
tweeters.
And on the book front, too. So, Nathan
at some point soon, hopefully, has an
RLHF book coming out.
>> It's available for pre-order, and
there's a full digital preprint. I'm
just making it pretty and better
organized for the physical thing, which
is a lot of why I do it because
it's fun to create things that you think
are excellent in the physical form when
so much of our life is digital.
>> I should say, going to Perplexity here,
Sebastian Raschka is a machine learning
researcher and author known for several
influential books. A couple of them that
I wanted to mention, which is a book I
highly recommend, Build a Large Language
Model from Scratch, and the new one,
Build a Reasoning Model from Scratch.
So, I'm really excited about that.
Building stuff from scratch is one of
the most powerful ways of learning.
>> Honestly, building an LM from scratch is
a lot of fun. It's also a lot of to
learn, and like you said, it's probably
the best way to learn how something
really works cuz
you can look at figures, but figures can
have mistakes. You can look at concepts,
explanations, but you might
misunderstand them. But if you see the
code, there is code, and the code works,
you know it's correct. I mean, there's
no misunderstanding. It's like it's
precise. Otherwise, it wouldn't work.
And I think that's like kind of like the
beauty behind coding. It is kind of like
it doesn't lie. It's math, basically, so
even though with math I think you can
have mistakes in a book you would never
notice because you're not running the
math when you're reading the book. You
can't verify this and with code what's
what's nice is you can verify it.
>> Yeah, I agree with you about the LLM
from scratch book. It's nice to tune out
everything else the internet and so on
and just focus on the book.
But, you know, I read uh several like,
you know, uh
history books.
It's just less lonely somehow. It's
really more fun. Like uh for example on
the programming front, I think it's
genuinely more fun to program with an
LLM. And I think it's genuinely more fun
to read with an LLM. But you're right,
like distractions should be minimized.
So it's uh you use the LLM to basically
enrich the experience, maybe add more
context.
Maybe the I just the rate of aha moments
for me in a small scale is really high
with LLMs.
>> 100% I would say I also want to correct
myself. I'm not suggesting not to use
LLMs. Uh I suggest doing it in multiple
passes. Like one pass just offline focus
mode and then after that
uh I mean I also take notes, but I
I try to resist the urge to
immediately look things up. I I do a
second pass. It's just like for me more
structured this way and I get I mean
sometimes things are answered in the
chapter, but sometimes also it just
helps to let it sink in and think about
it. Other people have different
preferences. I would highly recommend
using LLMs when reading books. For me
it's just it's not the first thing to
do. It's like the second pass.
>> By way of recommendation I should say I
do the opposite. I like to use the LLM
at the beginning to lay out the full
context of like what is this world that
I'm now stepping into. But I try to
avoid clicking out of the LLM into the
world of like Twitter blogs and because
then you're now down this rabbit hole,
you're reading somebody's opinion,
there's a flame war about a particular
topic, and all of a sudden you're no
longer you're now in the in the realm of
the internet and Reddit and so on. But
if you're purely
letting the LLM give you the context of
why this matters, what are the big
picture ideas.
Uh but sometimes books themselves are
good at doing that, but not always. So.
>> That's why I like the ChatGPT app cuz it
gives the AI a home in your computer
when you are focused you can focus on it
rather than just being another tab in my
massive internet options. And I think
Claude Code and these particular does a
good job of making that a joy where it
seems very
engaging as a product design to be an
interface that your AI will then go out
into the world. And there's something
that is very kind of intangible between
it and Codex is that it just feels kind
of warm and engaging. Where Codex can
often be as good from Open AI, but it
just kind of like feels a little bit
rougher on the edges. Whereas like
Claude Code is
makes it fun to build things
particularly from scratch where you just
don't like you don't have to care but
you trust that it'll make something.
Like obviously this is good for websites
and
kind of refreshing tooling and stuff
like this which I'd use it for or data
analysis. So I my my blog we scrape
Hugging Face we keep the download
numbers for every data set and model
over time now so we have them. And it's
like Claude was just like, "Yeah, I've
made use of that data, no problem." And
I was like, "That would have taken me
days." And it's like then I have enough
situational awareness to be like, "Okay,
these trends obviously make sense." And
you can check things.
Cuz that's just a kind of wonderful
interface where you can have an
intermediary and not have to do the kind
of awful low-level work that you would
have to do to maintain different web
projects and do this stuff.
>> All right, so we just talked about a
bunch of the closed weight models.
Let's talk about the open ones. Uh so
tell me about the landscape of open LLM
models. Which are interesting ones?
Which stand out to you?
And why? We already mentioned DeepSeek.
>> Do you I see how many we can name off
the top of our head.
>> Yeah, yeah, without looking at notes.
>> DeepSeek, Kimmy, MiniMax, Z.ai,
Ant Ling,
we're just going Chinese.
Let's throw in Mistral AI, Gemma,
yeah, GPT-OSS, the open-source model by
ChatGPT. Actually, Nvidia NeMo Tron had
a or Nvidia had a really cool one, the
NeMo Tron 3. There's a lot of stuff
especially at the end of the year. Qwen,
one maybe the one
>> Oh, yeah, Qwen was the name the obvious
name. It was the first thing.
>> I was trying to get through the You can
get at least 10 Chinese and at least 10
Western. I think that
I mean, OpenAI released their first open
model since GPT-2. That was when I when
I meant talk when I was writing about
OpenAI's open model release, they're all
like, "Don't forget about GPT-2." Which
I thought was really funny cuz it's just
such a different time. But GPT-OSS is
actually a very strong model and does
some things that the
other models
don't do very well and I think that
selfishly, I'll promote a bunch of like
Western companies. So, both in the US
and Europe have these like fully open
models. So, I work at Allen Institute
for AI. We've been building Olmo, which
releases data and code and all of this.
And now we have actual competition for
people that are trying to release
everything so that other people can
train these models. So, there's
the Institute for Foundation Models or /
LM360, which is like had their K2 models
of various types. EPFL is a Swiss
research consortium. Hugging Face has
small LM, which is very popular.
Nvidia's NeMo Tron has started releasing
data as well. And then
Stanford's MAIRIN community project,
which is kind of making it so there's a
pipeline for people to open a GitHub
issue and implement a new idea and then
have it run in a stable language
modeling stack. So, this space
that list was way smaller in 2024. So, I
think it was like just AI2. So, that's a
great thing for more people to get
involved in to understand language
models, which doesn't really have a like
a Chinese company that is has an analog.
While I'm talking, I will say that the
Chinese open language models tend to be
much bigger and that gives them this
higher peak performance as MOEs where a
lot of these things that we like a lot,
whether it was Gemma, um and D Metatron
have tended to be smaller models from
the US, which is which is starting to
change from the US US and Europe. Um
Mistral Large 3 came out, which was a
giant MOE model, very similar to
DeepSeek architecture in December. And
then a startup RCAI and both Numenta and
have Numenta and Nvidia have teased MOE
models of this way bigger than 100
billion parameters, like this 400
billion parameter range coming in this
like Q1 2026 timeline. So, I think this
kind of balance is set to change this
year in terms of what people are using
the Chinese versus US open models for,
which will be a which I'm personally
expecting is going to be very excited to
watch.
>> First of all, huge props for being able
to name so many of these. Did you
actually name Llama?
>> Um no.
>> like
>> RIP
>> That was not on purpose.
>> RIP Llama.
>> Mhm.
>> All right. Can you mention what are some
interesting models that stand out? So,
you mentioned Qwen 3's is is obviously a
standout.
>> So, I would say the year's almost
bookended by both DeepSeek version 3 and
R1. And then on the other hand in
December, DeepSeek version 3.2 because
what I like about those is they always
have an interesting architecture tweak
that others don't have. But otherwise,
if you want to go with um you know, like
the familiar but really good
performance, Qwen 3 and like um Nathan
said, also GPT- OSS. And I think GPT-
OSS, what's interesting about it is kind
of like the first public or like open
weight model that was really trained
with tool use in mind, which I do think
is kind of a little bit of a paradigm
shift where the ecosystem was not quite
ready for it. So, with tool use, I mean
that the LLM is able to do a web search,
to call a Python interpreter. And I do
think this is it's a standout because I
think it's a huge unlock because one of
the most common complaints about LLMs
are for example hallucinations, right?
And so in my opinion one of the best
ways to solve hallucinations is to not
try to always remember information or
make things up. For math, why not use a
calculator app or Python?
>> Mhm.
>> If I ask the LLM who won the I don't
know soccer World Cup in 1998, instead
of just trying to memorize, it could go
do a search. I think mostly it's usually
still a Google search. So ChatGPT, GPT-4
SS, they would do a tool call to Google,
maybe find the FIFA website, find okay,
it was France. It would get you that
information reliably instead of just
trying to memorize it. So I think it's a
huge unlock which I think right now is
not fully utilized yet by the open
source open weight ecosystem. A lot of
people don't use tool call modes because
I think it's first it's a trust thing.
You don't want to run this on your
computer where it has access to tools,
could wipe your hard drive or whatever.
So you want to maybe have containerize
that. Um but I do think, you know, that
that is like a really important step for
the upcoming years to have this ability,
yeah.
>> So
a few quick things. First of all, thank
you for defining what you mean by tool
use. I think that's a great thing to do
in general for the concepts we're
talking about. Even things as sort of
well established as MOEs,
you have to say that means mixture of
experts and you could kind of have to
build up an intuition for people what
that means, how it's actually utilized,
what are the different flavors.
So what does it mean that there's this
such explosion of open models?
What's your intuition?
>> If you're releasing an open model, you
want people to use it as the first and
foremost thing. And then after that
comes things like transparency and
trust. I think
when you look at China, the biggest
reason is that they want people around
the world to use these models and I
think a lot of people will not. If you
look outside of the US, a lot of people
will not pay for software, but they
might have computing resources where you
can put a model on it and run it. I
think it there can also be data that you
don't want to send to the cloud. So,
this the the number one thing is getting
people to use models, use AI, or use
your AI that might not be able to do it
without having access to the model.
>> I guess we should state explicitly, so
we've been talking about these Chinese
models
and open weight models,
often times the way they're run is
locally.
So, it's not like you're sending your
data to China or to whoever developed uh
to Silicon Valley, whoever developed the
model.
>> A lot of American startups make money by
hosting these models from China and
selling them selling tokens. It's called
like selling tokens, which means
somebody will call the model to do some
some piece of work. I think the other
reason is for US companies like that to
open the eyes. So, GPU deprived like
they're so they're at the limits of the
GPUs. Whenever they make a release,
they're always talking about like our
GPUs are hurting. And
I think this like
like in one of these like GPT- 4's
release sessions, Sam Altman said like,
"Oh, we're releasing this because we can
use your GPUs. We don't have to use we
don't have to use our GPUs and Open AI
can still get distribution out of this,
which is a another very real thing cuz
this doesn't cost them so anything." And
>> for the user, I think also, I mean,
there are users who just use the model
locally how they would use ChatGPT, but
also for companies, I think it's a huge
unlock to have these models because you
can customize them, you can train them,
you can
uh add post-training
add more data like specialize them into,
let's say, law, medical models, or
whatever you have. And the appeal, you
mentioned Ammar, the appeal of the open
weight models from China is that the
open weight models are also the licenses
are even friendlier. I think they are
just unrestricted open source licenses
where if you use something like Llama or
Gemma, there are some strings attached.
I think it's like a upper limit in terms
of how many users you have. And then if
you exceed, I don't know, so and so many
million users, you have to report your
finance
um situation to, let's say, Meta or
something like that. And I think, well,
it is a free model, but there are
strings attached, and people do like
things where strings are not attached.
So, I think that's also one of the
reasons, besides performance, why the
open weight models from China are so
popular, because you you can just use
them. There's no There's no catch in
that sense. Yeah.
>> The ecosystem has gotten better on that
front, but mostly downstream of these
new providers providing such open
licenses. That was funny when you pulled
up Perplexity. It said Kimiko thinking
hosted in the US, which is just like an
exact I've never seen this, but it's an
exact example of what we're talking
about, where people are sensitive to
this.
Like Kimiko thinking and Kimiko is a
model that is very popular. People say
that it has very good like creative
writing and also in doing some software
things. So, it's just these little
quirks that people pick up on with
different models that they like.
>> Uh what are some interesting ideas that
some of these models have explored that
you can speak to? Like that particular
interesting to you.
>> Maybe we can go chronologically. I mean,
there was, of course, DeepSeek DeepSeek
R1 that came out in January, if we just
focus on 2025. However, this was based
on DeepSeek version 3, which came out
the year before in December 2024.
There are multiple things on the
architecture side. What is fascinating
is you can still I mean, that's what I
do in my from scratch coding projects.
You can still start with GPT-2, and you
get can add things to that model to make
it into this other model. So, it's all
still kind of like the same lineage, the
same it is a very close relationship
between those. But, on top of my head,
DeepSeek what was
unique there is the mixture of ex I
mean, they were not inventing mixture of
experts. We can maybe talk a bit more
what mixture of experts means.
But, just to list these things first
before we dive into detail, mixture of
experts, but then they also had
multi-head latent attention, which is a
tweak to the attention mechanism, where
this was, I would say, 2025 the main
distinguishing
factor between these open weight models,
different tweaks to make inference or KV
cache size. We can also define KV cache
in a few moments, but to kind of make it
more economical to have long context to
shrink the KV cache size. So, what are
tweaks that we can do? And most of them
focused on the attention mechanism.
There is multi-head latent attention in
in DeepSeek. There is group query
attention, which is still very popular.
It's not invented by any of those
models. It goes back a few years, but
that would be the other option. Sliding
window attention, I think almost three
uses it if I remember correctly. So,
there are these different tweaks that
make the models different.
Otherwise, I put them all together in an
article once where
I just compared them. They are very
surprisingly similar. It's just
different numbers in terms of how many
repetitions of the transformer block you
have in the center.
And like just little little knobs that
people tune. But but what's so nice
about it is it's it it works no matter
what. You can tweak things. You can move
the normalization layers around. You get
some performance gains and I almost
always very good in ablation studies
showing what actually
what it does to the model if you move
something around. Ablation studies does
it make it better or worse? But there
are so many, let's say, ways you can
implement a transformer and make it
still work. Big ideas
that are still prevalent is mixture of
experts,
multi-head latent attention, sliding
window attention, group query attention.
And then at the end of the year we saw a
focus on making the attention mechanism
scale linearly with inference token
prediction. So, there were Qwen 3 next,
for example, which added a gated
DeltaNet. It's it's like kind of like
inspired by state-space models where you
have a fixed state that you keep
updating, but it makes essentially this
attention
cheaper or it replaces attention with a
cheaper operation.
>> And it maybe is a useful to step back
and talk about transformer architecture
in general.
>> Yes, so maybe we should start with the
GPT-2 architecture, the transformer that
was derived from the attention is all
you need paper.
>> Mhm.
>> So, the attention is all you need paper
had a transformer architecture that had
two parts, an encoder and a decoder. And
GPT went just focusing in on the decoder
part. It is essentially a still a neural
network
and it has this attention mechanism
inside.
And you predict one token at a time, you
pass it through an embedding layer.
There's the transformer block. The
transformer block has attention modules
and a fully connected layer. And there
are some normalization layers in
between, but it's essentially a neural
network layers with this attention
mechanism. So, coming from GPT-2, when
we move on to GPT- OSS, there is, for
example, the mixture of experts layer.
It's not invented by GPT- OSS. It's a
few years old,
but it is essentially a a tweak to make
the model larger without consuming more
compute in each forward pass. So, there
is this fully connected layer. And if
listeners are familiar with multi-layer
perceptrons, you can think of a mini
multi-layer perceptron, a fully
connected neural network layer inside
the transformer. And it's very expensive
because it's fully connected. If you
have 1,000 inputs, 1,000 outputs, it's
like a 1 million connections.
And it's a very expensive part in this
transformer. And the idea is
to kind of expand that into multiple
feedforward networks. So, instead of
having one, let's say you have 256, but
it would make it way more expensive
because now you have 256, but you don't
use all of them at the same time. So,
you now have a router that says, "Okay,
based on this input token, it would be
useful to use this
fully connected network." And in that
context, it's called an expert. So, a
mixture of experts means you have
multiple experts. And depending on what
your input is, let's say it's more math
heavy, it would use different experts
compared to, let's say, translating
input text from English to Spanish. It
would maybe consult different experts.
It's not quite clear, I mean, not as
clear-cut to say, "Okay, this is only an
expert for math and for Spanish." It's a
bit more fuzzy, but the idea is
essentially that you pack more knowledge
into the network, but not all the
knowledge is used all the time. That
would be very wasteful. So, you're kind
of like during the token generation,
you're more selective. There's a router
that selects which tokens should go to
which expert. Adds more complexity. It's
harder to train. There's a lot of, you
know, that can go wrong, like collapse
and everything. So, I think that's why
almost three still uses dense. I mean,
you have, I think, all models with
mixture of experts, but dense models,
where dense means Also, also, it's
jargon. There's a distinction between
dense and sparse. So, mixture of experts
is considered sparse because we have a
lot of experts, but only few of them are
active. So, that's called sparse. And
then, dense would be the opposite, where
you only have like one fully connected
module and it's always, you know,
utilized.
>> So, maybe maybe this is a good place
also to talk about KV cache, but
actually, before that, even zooming out,
like fundamentally, how many new ideas
have been implemented from from GPT-2 to
today? Like, how different really are
these architectures?
>> Picture like the mixture of experts. Um,
the attention mechanism in GPT-3, that
would be the group query attention
mechanism. So, it's a slight tweak from
multi-head attention to group query
attention, so that we have two. I think
they replaced uh layer norm by RMS norm,
but it's just like a different
normalization layer. Not a big change,
it's just like a a tweak. Um, the
non-linear activation function,
people familiar in with deep neural
networks, I mean, it's the same as
changing sigmoid with ReLU. It's It's
not changing the network fundamentally,
it's just like a tweak. You like a
little little tweak. Um, and that's
about it, I would say. It's not really
fundamentally that different. It's still
the same same architecture. So, you can
convert one from one
uh you can go from one into the other by
just adding these these changes
basically.
>> It's fundamentally is still the same
architecture.
>> Yep. So, for example, you mentioned my
book earlier, that's GPT-2 model in the
book because it's simple and it's very
small. So, 124 120 million parameters
approximately. But in the bonus
materials, I do have almost three from
scratch Gemma three from scratch and
other types of from scratch models. And
I always started with my GPT-2 model and
just, you know, tweaked the added
different components and you get from
one to the other. It's like it's kind of
like a lineage in a sense, yeah.
>> Can you build up an intuition for people
because sort of when you zoom out, you
look at it, there's so much rapid
advancement in the AI world?
And at the same time, fundamentally the
architectures have not changed.
So, where is all the turbulence, the
turmoil of the advancement happening?
Where where is the gains to be had?
>> So, there are the different stages where
you develop the network or train the
network. You have the pre-training. Now,
back then they was just pre-training
with GPT-2. Now, you have pre-training,
mid-training, and post-training.
So, I think right now we are in the
post-training focus stage. I mean,
pre-training still gives you
advantages if you scale it up to better
higher quality data. But then we have
capability unlocks that were not there
with GPT-2 for example.
Uh, ChatGPT, it is basically a GPT-3
model and and GPT-3 is the same as GPT-2
in terms of architecture. What was new
was adding the supervised fine-tuning
and the reinforcement learning with
human feedback. So, it's more on the
algorithmic side rather than the
architecture.
>> I would say that the systems also change
a lot. I think if you listen to Nvidia's
announcements, they talk about these
things like you now do FP8, you can now
do FP4. And what is happening is these
labs are figuring out how to utilize
more compute to put it into one model
which lets them train faster. And that
lets them put more data in. And then you
can find better configurations faster by
doing this. So, you can look at like the
essentially the tokens per second per
GPU is a metric that you look at when
you're doing large-scale training. And
you could get you can go from like 10K
to 13K by turning on FP8 training, which
means they're using less memory per
parameter in the model. And by saving
less information, you do less
communication and you can train faster.
So, all of these like system things
underpin way faster experimentation on
data and algorithms that is kind of like
it's this
it's this kind of
loop that keeps going. Where where it's
kind of hard to describe when you look
at the architecture and they're exactly
the same, but the code base used to
train these models is going to be vastly
different and
you could probably like I don't the GPUs
are different, but you probably train
GPT-OSS 20B way faster in wall clock
time than GPT-2 was trained at the time.
>> Yeah, like you said, they had for
example in the mixture of experts this
FP4 optimization, for example, where you
get more throughput, but I I do think
this is
for the speed, this is true, but it
doesn't give the model new capabilities
in a sense. It's just how much can we
make make the computation coarser
without suffering in terms of model
performance degradation.
Um but I do think I mean there are
alternatives popping up to the
transformer. There's text diffusion
models, completely different paradigm.
Um and there's also I mean although text
diffusion models might use transformer
architectures, but it's not an auto auto
regressive transformer. And also Mamba
models, it's a state space model, but
they do have trade-offs and what's right
is there's nothing that has replaced the
auto regressive transformer as state of
the art model. So, like for state of the
art, you would still do that go with
that thing, but there are now
alternatives for the cheaper and like
alternatives that are kind of
making compromises, but it's not just
one architecture anymore. There are
little ones coming up, but if we talk
about the state of the art, it's pretty
much still the
the transformer architecture auto
regressive derived from GPT-2
essentially.
>> I guess the big question here is we
talked quite a bit here on the
architecture behind the the
pre-training.
Are the scaling laws holding strong
across pre-training, post-training,
inference, context size, data, synthetic
data?
>> I like to start with the technical
definition of scaling law which kind of
informs all of this. The scaling law is
a power law relationship between you
could think of the x-axis so kind of
what you are scaling is a combination of
compute and data which are kind of
similar. And then the y-axis is like the
held out prediction accuracy over next
tokens. We talked about models being
auto regressive. It's like if you keep a
set of
text that the model has not seen, how
accurate will it get when you will
train? And the idea of scaling laws came
when people figured out that that was a
very predictable relationship. And I
think that
that technical term is continuing and
then the question is like what do users
get out of it? And then there are more
types of scaling where
um OpenAI's 01 was famous for
introducing inference time scaling. And
I think less famously for also showing
that you can scale reinforcement
learning training and get kind of this
log x-axis and then a linear increase in
performance on y-axis. So there's kind
of these three axes now where the
traditional scaling laws are talk talked
about for pre-training which is how big
your model is and how big your data set
is. And then
scaling reinforcement learning which is
like how long can you do this trial and
error learning that we will talk about
will define more of this. And then this
inference time compute which is just
letting the model generate more tokens
on a specific problem. So I'm kind of
bullish where they're uh they're all
really still working, but the
low-hanging fruit has mostly been taken
especially in the last year on
um reinforcement learning with
verifiable rewards which is this RLVR
and then inference time scaling which is
just why these models feel so different
to use, where previously you would get
that first token immediately, and now
they will go off for seconds, minutes,
or even hours generating these hidden
thoughts before giving you the first
word of your answer. And that's all
about this inference time scaling, which
is
such a
wonderful kind of step function in terms
of how the models change abilities. They
kind of enabled this tool use stuff, and
enabled this much better software
engineering that we were talking about.
And this is
when we say enabled almost entirely
downstream of the fact that this
reinforcement learning with verifiable
rewards training just kind of
let the models pick up these skills very
easily. So, let the models
learn. So, if you look at the reasoning
process when the models are generating a
lot of tokens, what it will be often
doing is it tries a tool, it looks at
what it gets back, it tries another API,
it sees what it gets back, and if it
solves the problem. So, the models when
you're training them very quickly learn
to do this.
And then, at the end of the day, that
gives us kind of general foundation
where the model can use CLI commands
very nicely in your repo, and handle Git
for you, and move things around, and
organize things, or search to find more
information, which if we're
sitting in these chairs a year ago is
something that we didn't really think of
the models being doing. So, this is just
kind of something that has happened this
year, and is
totally transformed how we think of
using AI, which I think is very magical.
It's such an interesting evolution, and
just so unlocks so much value.
But it's it's like it's not clear what
the next avenue will be in terms of
unlocking stuff like this. I think that
there's there's a we'll get to continual
learning later, but there's a lot of
buzz around certain areas of AI, but no
one knows when the next step function
will will really come.
>> So, you you've actually said quite a lot
of things there,
and said profound things quickly. It
would be nice to unpack them a little
bit. You said you're bullish basically
on every version of scaling. So, can we
just even start at the beginning.
Pre-training.
Are we kind of implying that the
low-hanging fruit on pre-training
scaling has been picked? Is Is Is
pre-training hit a plateau or is even
pre-training still you're bullish on?
>> Pre-training has gotten extremely
expensive. I think to scale up
pre-training, it's also implying that
you're going to serve a very large model
to the users. So, I think that
it's been loosely established the likes
of GPT-4 and similar models were around
1 trillion like this order of trillion
parameters at the biggest size. There's
a lot of rumors that they've actually
gotten smaller as training has gotten
more efficient.
You want to make the model smaller
because then your costs of serving go
down proportionally. These models the
cost of training them is really low
relative to the cost of serving them to
hundreds of millions of users. I think
DeepSeek had this famous number of about
$5 million for pre-training at cloud
market rates. I think almost three. Um
section 2.4 in the paper, we just
detailed how long we had the GPU
clusters sitting around for training,
which includes
engineering issues, multiple seeds, and
it was like about $2 million to rent the
cluster to like deal with all the
problems and headaches of training a
model. So,
these models are pretty like a lot of
people could get $1 to $10 million to
train a model, but the recurring costs
of serving millions of users is really
billions of dollars of compute. I think
that you can look at close like 1,000
GPU rental, you can pay $100,000 a day
for and these companies could have
millions of GPUs. Like you can look at
how much these things cost to sit
around. So, that's kind of a big
thing and then it's like if scaling is
actually giving you a better model, like
is it going to be financially worth it?
And I think it will kind of slowly we'll
push it out as AI solves more compelling
tasks. So, like the likes of Claude Opus
4.5 making Claude code
just work for things. I think I I
launched this project called like the
Adam project, which is like American
truly open models in July and that was
like a true vibe coded website and like
I have a job
make plots and stuff and then I came
back to refresh it in the last few weeks
and it's like Claude Opus 4.5 versus
whatever model at the time was like just
crushed all the issues that I had from
building in June July and like might be
a bigger model. There's a lot of things
that go into this but that's like
there's still progress coming.
>> So so what you're speaking to is the
nuance of the Y axis of the scaling laws
that the way it's experienced versus on
a benchmark the actual intelligence is
might might be different but still your
intuition about pre-training if you
scale the size of compute
will the models get better not whether
it's financially viable but just from
the law aspect of it. Do you think the
models will get smarter?
>> Yeah and I think that there's
and this sometimes comes off as like
almost like disillusioned from people
leadership AI companies saying this but
they're like it's held for 13 orders of
magnitude of computer or something like
why would it ever end? So I think
fundamentally it
is pretty unlikely to stop it's just
like eventually we're not even going to
be able to test the bigger scales
because of all the problems that come
with more compute. I think that there's
a lot of talk on how 2026 is a year when
very large Blackwell compute clusters
like gigawatt scale facilities that
hyperscalers are coming online and
these were all contracts for power and
data centers that were signed and sought
out in like 2022 and 2023. So before or
right after ChatGPT so it took this two
to three year lead time to build these
bigger clusters to train the models.
Well there's obviously immense interest
in building even more data centers than
that. So that is like kind of the crux
that people are saying is like these new
clusters are coming the labs are going
to have more compute for training
they're going to utilize this
but it's not a given and it's like I
I've seen so much progress that I expect
it and I expect a little bit bigger
models and I expect um I would
say it's more like we'll see a $2,000
subscription this year. We've seen $200
subscriptions. It's like that can 10x
again. And these are the kind of things
that could come, and they're all
downstream of this like bit bigger bit
bigger model that offers just a little
bit more cutting edge.
>> So, you know, it's reported that xAI is
going to hit that uh 1 gigawatt scale
early '26
and full 2 gigawatt by year end.
How do you think they'll utilize that
in the context of scaling laws?
Is Is a lot of that inference? Is a lot
of that training?
>> It ends up being all of the above. So, I
think that
all of your decisions when you're
training a model come back to
pre-training. So, if you're going to
scale RL in a model, you still need to
decide on your architecture that enables
this. We were talking about like
other architectures than using different
types of attention. We're also talking
about mixture of experts models. This
sparse nature of MoE models makes it
much more efficient to do
generation, which becomes a big part of
post-training. And it's like you need to
have your architecture ready so that you
can actually scale up this compute. I
still think most of the compute is going
in at pre-training because you can still
make a model better. You still want to
go and revisit this. You will still want
the best base model that you can. And in
a few years that'll saturate, and the
the RL compute will just go longer.
>> Is there a people who disagree with you
that say basically pre-training is dead?
It's all about scaling inference,
scaling post-training, scaling context,
continual learning, uh scaling data,
synthetic data.
>> People vibe that way and describe it in
that way, but I think it's not the
practice that is happening.
>> general vibe of people saying this thing
is dead.
>> is elsewhere. So, the low-hanging fruit
in RL is elsewhere. Like, for example,
we released our model in November for
Every company has deadlines. Our
deadline was like November 20th. And our
for that our RL run was 5 days, which
compared to 2024 is a very long time to
just be doing post training at a model
of like 30 billion parameters. It's not
a big model. And then in December we had
another release, which was just we let
the RL run for go go for another 3 and
1/2 weeks and the model got notably
better, so we released it. And like
that's a big amount of time to just
allocate to like something that is going
to be your peak for the year. So it's
like So these these types of decisions
that happen when they're training a
model where they just like can't they
can't leave it forever. You have to keep
you have to keep pulling in the
improvements you have from your
researchers. So that's like you redo
pre-training. You'll do this post
training for a month, but then you need
to give it to your users. You need to do
safety testing. So there's kind of just
like I think there's a lot in place that
it reinforces this cycle of just keep
updating the models. There's things to
improve. You get a new compute cluster
that's lets you do something maybe more
stable or faster.
It's like you hear a lot about Blackwell
having roll out issues where
at AI2 most of the models were
pre-training around like 1 to 2,000
GPUs. But when you're pre-training on
10,000 or 100,000 GPUs, you hit very
different failures. So GPUs are known to
break in weird ways. And doing a 100,000
GPU run is like you're pretty much
guaranteed to always have at least one
GPU that is down. And you need to have
your training code handle that
redundancy, which is just a very
different problem. Whereas like what
we're doing like I'm playing with post
training on a DGX Spark or you have your
book is like or people learning ML it's
like what they're battling to train
these biggest models is just like mass
distributed scale. And it's a very
different but that's somewhat different
than like are these like that's a
systems problem in order to enable the
scaling laws especially at pre-training.
You need all these GPUs at once.
When we shift to reinforcement learning,
it actually lends itself to
heterogeneous compute because you have
many copies of a model.
And
but to do a primer for language model
reinforcement learning, what you're
doing is you have two sets of GPUs. One
is you can call it the actor, and one
you call the learner. The learner is
where your actual reinforcement learning
updates are going to do. These are
traditionally policy gradient
algorithms,
proximal policy optimization, PPO, and
group relative policy optimization,
GRPO, are the two popular classes. And
on the other side, you're going to have
actors, which are generating
completions. And these completions are
the things that you're going to grade.
So, reinforcement learning is all about
optimizing reward. And in practice, what
you can do is that you can have a lot of
different actors in different parts of
the world doing different types of
problems, and then you send it back to
this highly networked compute cluster to
do this actual learning, where you where
you take the where you take the
gradients, and you need to have a
tightly meshed network where you can do
different types of parallelism and
spread out your model for efficient
training. So, there's just like a lot of
every different type of training and
serving has these considerations you
need to scale. Like we talked about
pre-training, we talked about RL, and
then inference time scaling is like, how
do you serve a model that's thinking for
an hour to 100 million users? And like,
I don't really know about that, but I
know that's a hard problem, and in order
to give people this intelligence,
there's all these systems problems that
we need more compute, and you need more
stable compute to do it.
>> But, you're bullish on all of these
kinds of scaling is what I'm hearing. On
the inference, on the reasoning,
even on the pre-training.
>> Yeah, so that's a big can of worms here,
but so that's basically two the knobs
are the training and the uh inference
scaling, where you can get gains. And
so, in an in a world where we had, let's
say, infinite compute resources, you
want to do all of them about like so,
you have training, you have inference
scaling,
and training is like a hierarchy, it's
pre-training, mid-training,
post-training.
Changing the model size, more training
data, making training a bigger model
gives you more knowledge in the model.
The model um
let's say has a better It's like a
better base model. Back in the day I
mean still we call it foundation model
and it unlocks so you but you don't
let's say have the model be able to
solve your most complex task tasks
during pre-training or after
pre-training. You still have these other
unlock phases where you have
mid-training or long context for example
post-training with RLHF that unlocks
capabilities that the model has in terms
of just knowledge in the pre-training
and I think sure if you uh so
do more pre-training you get a better
base model that you can unlock later but
like Nathan said it it just becomes too
expensive. So we don't have infinite
compute so you have to decide do I want
to spend that compute more on making the
model larger but you know it's like a
trade-off. It's it's like in an ideal
world you want to do all of them and I
think in that sense scaling is still
pretty much alive. You would still get a
better model but like we saw with
GPT-4.5 it's just not worth it. I mean
it's like cuz you can
let's say you can unlock more
performance with other techniques at
that current moment. Especially um if
you look at inference scaling that's one
of the biggest gains this year with 01
um where it took a smaller model further
than
pre-training a larger model like
GPT-4.5. So it's like I wouldn't say
pre-training scaling is dead it's just
like there are other more attractive
ways to scale right now at the moment
but at some point you know you will
still want to make some progress on the
pre-training. The thing is also to
consider
um
where you where do you want to spend
your money? If you spend it more on the
pre-training it's like a fixed cost. You
train the model and then it has this
capability forever. You can always use
it and so forth. With inference scaling
you don't spend money during training
you spend money later per query and then
it's also like the math
how long is my model going to be on the
market if I replace it in half a year
maybe it's not worth spending
5 million 10 million 100 million dollars
on the training it longer. Maybe it's
just I will just
do more inference scaling and get the
performance from there. It maybe cost me
2 million in terms of user queries. It
becomes a question of how many users you
have and then doing the math. Um, and I
think that's also where it's interesting
where ChatGPT is in a position, I think
they have a lot of users, where they
need to go a bit cheaper, where they
have that uh GPT-5 model that is a bit
smaller. Other companies that have
as if your customers have other
uh other um tradeoffs. For example,
there was also the math Olympiad or some
of these these math uh problems where
ChatGPT or maybe they had a proprietary
model and I'm pretty sure it's just like
a model that has been maybe fine-tuned a
little bit more, but most of it was
doing influence scaling to achieve this
peak performance in certain task where
you don't need that all the time. And
but yeah, long story short, I do think
all of these uh pre-training,
mid-training, post-training, uh
influence scaling, they are all still
things you want to do. It's just finding
at the moment in this year, it's finding
the right ratio that gives you the best
bang for the buck, basically.
>> I think this might be a good place to
define pre-training, mid-training, and
post-training.
>> So, pre-training is the classic training
uh one next token prediction at a time.
You have a big corpus of data. And uh
Nathan also has very interesting
insights there because of almost three
it's a big portion of the paper focuses
on the right data mix. So, pre-training
is essentially just, you know, train
cross-entropy loss training on next
token prediction on a uh vast corpus of
internet data, books, papers, and so
forth. It has changed a little bit over
the years in the sense people used to
throw in everything they can. Now, it's
not just raw data, it's also synthetic
data where people re um let's say
rephrase certain things. Uh so,
synthetic data doesn't necessarily mean
purely
AI made-up uh data. It's also taking
something from an article, Wikipedia
article, and then
rephrasing it as a Q&A question or um
summarizing it, rewording it, and and
making a better data that way. Cuz I
think I would also like with humans if
someone that's a reads a book compared
to a messy I don't know an offense but
like Reddit post or something like that.
I do think you learn
No offense but I think
>> There's going to be a post about this
Saracha.
Some Reddit data is very common and
excellent for training. You just have to
filter it.
>> Yeah.
>> And I think that's the idea.
I think it's like
if someone took that and rephrases that
in a let's say in a more concise and
structured way
I think it's higher quality data that
gets the LM maybe
the same you get the same LM out of it
at the end but it gets there faster. It
trains faster because the
let's say if the grammar and the
punctuation is correct it already learns
the correct way versus getting
information from a messy way and then
learning later how to correct that and
stuff like that. So I think that is how
pre-training evolved and how
how still while
while scaling still works is that it's
not about just amount of data. It's also
the tricks to make that data
better for you in a sense. And then
mid-training is I mean it used to be
called a pre-training. It's I think it's
called mid-training because it was
awkward to have pre-training and
post-training but nothing in the middle,
right? It sounds a bit weird you have
pre-training and post-training but
what's the actual training? So the
mid-training is usually similar to
pre-training but you know it's a bit
more I would say specialized in
pre-training. It's the same algorithm
but what you do is you focus for example
on long context like this one example
you have long context documents. The
reason you don't do that during just
pure pre-training is because you don't
have that many long context documents.
So you have a specific phase and one
problem of LMs is also still it's a
neural network. It has the problem of
catastrophic forgetting. So you teach it
something and it forgets other things
and you want to
it's not 100% forgetting but you know
it's like no free lunch. You can't It's
also the same with humans. If you ask me
some math I learned 10 years ago I don't
know. I would have to look at it again.
>> Uh Nathan was actually saying that he's
consuming so much content that there's a
catastrophic forgetting issue.
>> Yeah, I'm like trying to learn so much
about AI and it's like I was learning
about pre-training parallelism. I'm like
I lost something and I don't know what
it was.
>> I don't want to anthropomorphize LLMs,
but it's I think the same kind of in
that sense how humans learn. I mean,
the quantity is not always better
because yeah, you it's like being
selective and I and the mid-training is
being selective in terms of quality
content so the last thing the LLM has
seen is the quality stuff and then
post-training is all the
fine-tuning and supervised fine-tuning
DPO
reinforcement learning with verifiable
rewards
with human feedback and so forth. So,
the refinement stages and it's also
interesting it's like the cost thing,
right? I mean, it's like pre-training
you spend a lot of money on that right
now. RL a bit less. RL you don't really
I would say teach it knowledge. It's
more like unlocking the knowledge. It's
more like a skill learning like how to
solve problems with the knowledge that
it has from pre-training. There are
actually three papers this year or last
year 2025 on RL for pre-training, but I
I mean, I don't think anyone does that
in production.
>> Toy examples for now.
>> Toy examples, right? But to generalize
RL post-training is more like the skill
unlock where pre-training is like
soaking up the knowledge essentially.
>> A few
things that could be helpful for people.
A lot of people get like
they have think of synthetic data as
being bad for training the models. You
mentioned like the deep sea got almost
OCR which is optical character
recognition paper. A lot of labs did.
AI2 had one.
Like had multiple and the reason that
each of these labs have these is because
there's vast amounts of PDFs and other
digital documents on the web that are in
formats that aren't encoded with text
easily. So, you use these almost CR
these or deep sea OCR and we called our
almost CR to extract what could be
trillions of tokens of
candidate data for pre-training. And
pre-training data set size is on the
order of trillions is measured in
trillions of tokens. Smaller models from
researchers can be something like 5 to
10 trillion.
Cwen is documented going up to like 50
trillion and there's rumors that these
closed labs can go to like 100 trillion
tokens. And just getting this potential
data to put in, I think they they have a
very big funnel and then the data you
actually train the model on is a small
percentage of this. Like the This
character recognition data would be
described as synthetic data for
pre-training in a lab. And then there's
also the things like
Chat GPT now gives wonderful answers and
you could train on those best answers
and that's synthetic data. It's very
different than like early Chat GPT lots
of hallucinations data when people
became grounded in synthetic data.
>> One interesting question is, if I recall
correctly, almost three was trained with
less data than specifically some other
open weight models, maybe even almost
two, but you still got better
performance and that might be one of the
examples how the data helped.
>> It's mostly down to data quality. I
think if we had more compute we would
train for longer. I think we'd
ultimately see that as a
like just like something we would want
to do and especially with big models you
need to have more compute because
we talk about having more parameters and
we talk about knowledge and essentially
there's a ratio where big models can
absorb more from data and then you're
going to
you get more benefit out of this. It's
it's it's like one of these. Any
logarithmic graph in your mind is like a
small model will level off sooner if
you're measuring trends in tokens and
bigger bigger models need more. But
mostly is
we aren't training that big of models
right now at AI2 and getting the highest
quality data we can is
the natural starting point.
>> Is there something to be said
about the topic of data quality? Is
there some low hanging fruit there still
where the quality could be improved?
>> It's like turning the crank. So I think
historically in the open there's been
like a canonical best pre-training data
set that has moved around between who
has the most recent one or the best or
the recent effort. Like 2's Dolma was
very early with the first Dolma and
hugging face had fine web and there's a
DCLM project which has been kind of like
a which is
it stands for data comp language model.
There's been data comp for other machine
learning projects and they have a had a
very strong data set. And a lot of it is
the internet is becoming fairly closed
off. So we have common crawl which I
think is hundreds of trillions of tokens
and you filter it and it looks like
being a lot of scientific work where
you're training classifiers and making
decisions based on how do you prune down
this this data set into the highest
quality stuff and the stuff that suits
your task. So previously language models
were tested a lot more on like knowledge
and just kind of conversational things
but now they're expected to do math and
code. So to train a reasoning model you
need to remix your whole data set. And
there's a lot of actually wonderful
scientific methods here where you can
you can like take your gigantic data set
you sample a lot of really tiny things
from different sources. So you say you
have GitHub, Stack Exchange, Reddit,
Wikipedia. You can sample small things
from them and you train small models on
each of these mixes and measure their
performance on your evaluations and you
can just do like basic linear regression
and it's like here's your optimal data
set. But if your evaluations change your
data set changes a lot. So a lot of Olmo
3 was new sources for reasoning to be
better at math and code. To and then you
do this mixing procedure and it gives
you the answer. And I think that's a lot
of that's happened at labs this year is
like there's new hot things whether it's
like coding environments or web
navigation and you just need to bring in
new data you need to change your whole
pre-training so that your post-training
can work better.
And stuff like that. So that's like the
constant re-
re-evolution and the re-determining of
what they care about as they're for
their models.
>> Are there fun anecdotes of what sources
of data are particularly high quality
that we wouldn't expect? You mentioned
Reddit sometimes can be a source.
>> Reddit was very useful. I think that
um like PDFs this definitely one.
>> Or especially archive.
>> Yeah, so like AI2 has run Semantic
Scholar for a long time, which is a um
like it would you can say is a
competitor to Google Scholar with a lot
more features. And to do this, AI2 has
found and scraped a lot of PDFs for
openly accessible papers that might not
be um like behind the closed paid garden
of a certain publisher. So, like truly
open scientific PDFs. And if you like
you sit on all of these and you process
it and you can get value out of it. And
I think that like
a lot of that style of work has been
done by the Frontier Labs much earlier.
And it's just like you need to have a
pretty skilled researcher that
understands how things change models and
they bring it in and they clean it. And
it's it's a lot of labor that like I
think of a lot of Frontier Labs when
they scale researchers a lot more goes
into data.
You have people like if you want to be
if you join a Frontier Lab and you want
to have an impact, the best way to do it
is just make find a new data that's
better. And then like the fancy
glamorous algorithmic things like
figuring out how to make a one is like
the sexiest thought of a scientist. It's
like oh, I figured out to scale RL. And
there's a group that did that, but I
think of most of the contributions is
like
>> On the data side.
>> I'm going to make the data better or I'm
going to make the infrastructure better
so that everybody in my team can run
experiments 5% faster.
>> At the same time, I think it's also one
of the closest guarded secrets what your
training data is for legal reasons. And
so, there's also I think a lot of work
that goes into hiding what your training
data was essentially. So, like trying
the model to not give away the sources
because yeah, for legal reasons.
>> The other thing to be complete is that
some people are trying to train on only
licensed data where Common Crawl is a
scrape of like the whole internet. So,
um if I I host multiple websites, I'm
happy to have them train language
models, but I'm not explicitly licensing
what governs it. And therefore, this
license the Common Crawl is largely
unlicensed, which means that your
consent really hasn't been provided for
how to use the data. There's another
idea where you can train language models
only on data that has been licensed
explicitly so that the kind of governing
contract is provided. And I'm not sure
if Apertis is the copyright thing or the
license thing. I know that the reason
that they did it was for an EU
compliance thing where they want to make
sure that their model
fit one of those checks.
>> And also on that note, also for example,
there's also the distinction between
the licensing. So,
some people, like you said, they
just purchase the license. Let's say
they buy a book online let's say on
Amazon Kindle book or let's say money
book or something and then use that in
the training data. And that is like the
gray zone because you paid for the
content and you might want to train it.
But then there are also restrictions
where even that shouldn't be allowed.
And so that that is like where where it
gets a bit fuzzy and
yeah, I think that is right now still a
hot topic and also big companies like
OpenAI, they approached private
companies for their proprietary data.
And private companies, they become more
and more, let's say,
protective of their data because they
know, "Okay, this is going to be my moat
in in a few years." And I do think um
that's like the interesting question
where
if LLMs become more commoditized, then I
think a lot of people learn about LLMs
that there will be a lot more people
able to train LLMs. Of course, there are
infrastructure challenges, but if you
think of big industries like
pharmaceutical industries, law, finance
industries, I do think they at some
point will hire people from other
frontier labs to build their in-house
models on their proprietary data, which
will be then again another unlock with
pre-training that is currently not there
because even if you wanted to, you can't
get that data. You can't get access to
clinical trials most of the time and
these types of things. So, I do think
scaling in that sense might be still
pretty much alive if you also look in
domain-specific applications because we
are still right now in this year just
looking at general-purpose LLMs on
ChatGPT, Anthropic, and so forth. They
are just general-purpose. They are not
even I think scratching the surface of
what an LM can do if it is really
specifically trained and designed for a
specific task.
>> I think on the data thing, this is one
of the things where I like this happened
in 2025 and we totally forget it is
Anthropic lost in court and was owed a
1.5 billion dollars to authors.
Anthropic I think bought thousands of
books and scanned them and was cleared
legally for that because they bought the
books and that is kind of going through
the system. And then the other side they
also torrented some books and I think
this torrenting was the path where the
court said that they were then culpable
to pay this billions of dollars to
authors, which is just like such a
mind-boggling lawsuit that kind of just
came and went. Like that is so much
money from the VC ecosystem.
>> These are court cases that will define
the future of human civilization cuz it
is clearly that data drives a lot of
this and there's this very complicated
human tension of
I mean you can empathize you're both
authors.
And there's some degree to which
I mean you put your heart and soul and
your your sweat and tears into the the
writing that you do
uh it feels a little bit like theft for
somebody to train your data without
giving you credit.
>> And then like Nathan said also two
layers to it. Someone might buy the book
and then train on it, which is could not
be argued fair or not fair, but then
there are the three straight up um
companies who
use pirated books where it's not even
compensating the author. It's that is I
think where people got a bit angry about
it specifically.
>> there has to be some kind of
compensation scheme. This is like moving
towards
towards something like Spotify streaming
did originally for music. You know, what
does that compensation look like? You
have to define those kinds of models.
You have to think through all of that.
Uh one other thing I think people are
generally curious about. I'd love to get
your thoughts.
As LLMs are used more and more, if you
look at even archive but GitHub
more and more of the data is generated
by LLMs.
What do you do in that kind of world?
Is how big of a problem is that?
>> Largest problem is infrastructure and
systems, but from an AI point of view is
kind of inevitable.
>> So it's basically LLM generated data
that's curated by humans essentially,
right?
>> Yes, and I think that a lot of open
source contributors are legitimately
burning out. If you have a popular open
source repo, somebody's like, "Oh, I
want to do open source AI. It's good for
my career." And they just
vibe code something and and they throw
it into the You might get more of this
than I would do.
>> So I have a actually a case study here.
Um I have a repository called ML-Extend
that I developed as a student 15 years
10 years ago. And it is a reasonably
popular library still for certain
algorithms. I think especially like
frequent data mining stuff. And there
was recently I think two or three people
who submitted a lot of PRs in a very
short amount of time. I do think LLMs
have been involved in submitting these
PRs. Me as the maintainer, that two
things. First, I'm a bit overwhelmed.
Like I don't have time to read through
it because especially it's an older
library that is not a priority for me.
At the same time I kind of also
appreciate it because
I think something people forget is it's
not just using the LLM. There's still a
human You have a human layer that
verifies something. And And And that is
in a sense also how data is labeled,
right? So that's like
one of the most expensive things is get
getting labeled data for RL back human
feedback phases. And And this is kind of
like that where
it goes through phases and then you get
actually higher quality data out of it.
You know, it's so I I I don't mind it in
a sense. It It can feel overwhelming,
but I do think there is also value in
it.
>> It feels like there's a fundamental
difference between raw LLM generated
data and LLM generated data with human
in the loop that does some kind of
verification, even if that verification
is a small percent
of the lines of code.
>> I think this goes with anything like
where
people think also sometimes, "Oh, yeah,
I can just use an LLM to learn about
XYZ." Which is true, you can. But, there
might be a person who is an expert who
might have used an LLM to write so
specific code. There is kind of like
this human work that went into it to
make it nice and throwing out the
not-so-nice part to make it to kind of
like pre-digest it for you, and that
saves you time. And I think that's it's
that that's the value add where you have
someone
filtering things or even using the LLMs
correctly. I think this is still labor
that that you get for free with you, for
example, read an article, let's say
Substack article. I could maybe ask an
LLM to give me opinions on that, but I
wouldn't even maybe know what to ask.
And I think there is still value in
reading that article compared to me
going to the LLM because
you are the expert, you select what
knowledge is actually spot-on, should be
included, and you give me this very this
this um
executive summary. And and and this is
kind of huge value add because now I
don't have to waste 3 5 hours to go
through this myself, maybe get some
incorrect information, and so on. And
so, I think that's also where the future
still is for writers, even though there
are LLMs that expert can kind of like
save your time.
>> It's kind of fascinating actually watch
and did and I'm sure you guys do this,
but for me
to look at the difference between the
summary
and the original content. Even if it's a
page-long summary of a page-long
content, it's interesting to see how the
summary LLM base summary takes the edge
off. Like, what what is the signal it
removes from the thing?
>> The voice is what I talk about a lot.
>> Voice Well, voice I'd love to hear what
you mean by voice. That's really
powerful. But, sometimes there's like
literally insights. Like, in removing an
insight, you're actually fundamentally
changing the meaning of the thing. So,
I'm continuously disappointed how bad
LLMs are
at really getting to the core insights,
which is what a great summary does.
Yeah, even if you go and I have these
extensive, extremely elaborate prompts
where I'm like really trying to dig for
the insights, and it's still not quite
there, which
um I mean, that's a whole deep
philosophical question about what is
human knowledge and wisdom, and what
does it mean to be insightful, and so
on. But, when you talk about the voice,
what do you mean?
>> So, when I write, I think a lot of what
I'm trying to do is take
what you think as a researcher, which
it's very raw. Which a researcher is
trying to encapsulate an idea at the
frontier of their understanding, and
they're trying to put what is a feeling
into words. And I think that my writing,
I tried to do this as the writing, which
makes it come across as raw, but also
high information in in a way that is
like some people will get it and some
won't, and that's kind of the nature of
research. And I think this is something
that language models don't do well.
Particularly, they're all trained with
this reinforcement learning from human
feedback, which is designed to take
feedback from a lot of people, and in a
way average how the model behaves from
this. And I think that there's
it's going to be hard for a model to be
very incisive when there's that sort of
filter in it. And I think this is kind
of a
wonderful fundamental problem for
researchers in RLHF. It's like this
provides so much utility in making the
models better, but also the problem
formulation is kind of like there's this
knot in it that you can't get past. So,
that's what I think of as like
these language models don't have this
prior in their deep expression that
they're trying to get at. I don't think
it it's impossible to do. I think
there's stories of models that really
shock people. Like, I think of like I
would love to have tried Bing Sydney.
And does like does that have more voice?
Cuz it would so often go off the rails
on people and
it would what is historically obviously
a scary way. Like, telling a reporter to
leave his wife is a crazy model to
potentially put in general general
adoption. But, that's kind of like a
trade-off. Like is this RLHF process
like in some ways adding limitations?
>> It's a terrifying place to be as one of
these frontier labs and and companies.
Because millions of people are using
them.
>> There was a lot of backlash last year
with the GPT-4 getting removed. And I
personally never used the model, but
I've talked to people at OpenAI where
they're
to the point where they like get emails
from users that might be detecting
subtle differences in the deployments in
the middle of the night and they email
them and they're like, "My friend is
different." And they like find these
people employees emails
and send them things because they are so
attached to this
set What is this set of model weights in
a configuration that is deployed to the
users? We see this with TikTok. You open
it I I don't use TikTok. But supposedly
in like 5 minutes the algorithm gets
you. It's like it's locked in. And I
don't like those are language models
doing recommendations. Like I think
there are ways that you can do this with
a language model within like 5 minutes
of chatting with it. The model just gets
you. And that is something that
people aren't really ready for. Like I
think that if
kid like don't give that to kids like
don't give that to kids at least until
we know what's happening.
>> also going to be this mechanism what's
going to happen with these LLMs as
they're used more and more.
Uh unfortunately, the nature of the
human condition is such that people
commit suicide.
And so what journalists would do is they
will report extensively on the people
who commit suicide and they would very
likely link it to the LLMs because they
have that data about the conversations.
If you're really struggling in your
life, if you're depressed, if you're
thinking about suicide, you're going to
probably talk to LLMs about it. And so
what journalists will do is they will
say, "Well, the suicide was committed
because of the LLM." And that's going to
lead to the companies
because of legal issues and so on more
and more and more taking the edge off of
the LLM. So it's going to be as generic
as possible. It's so difficult to
operate in this space because of course
you don't want an LLM
to cause harm to humans at that level.
But also
this is also the nature of the human
experience is to have a rich
conversation, a fulfilling conversation,
one that challenges you and from which
you grow. You need that edge.
And
that that that's something extremely
difficult for AI researchers on the RLHF
front to actually have to solve. Cuz
you're actually dealing with the human
condition.
>> Like a lot of researchers at these
companies are so well motivated. And
they definitely they like some anthropic
and opening eye are culturally
so want to do good through this for the
world. And there is it's such a I'm like
I don't want to work on this. Because on
the one hand a lot of people see AI as a
health ally, as somebody they can talk
to about their health confidentially.
But then it bleeds all the way into this
like talking about mental health and
things where
at this it's
heartbreaking that this will push like
be the thing where somebody goes over
the edge. But other people might be
saved. And I'm like I don't like there's
things that as a researcher training
models it's like I don't want to train
image generation models and release them
openly cuz I don't want to enable
somebody to have a tool on their laptop
that can harm
other people. Like I don't have the
infrastructure at my company to do that
safely. But it's like like there's a lot
of the areas like this where it's just
it needs people that will approach it
with the complexity and kind of
conviction of like it's just such a hard
problem.
>> But also we as a society as users of
these technologies need to make sure
that we're having the complicated
conversation about it versus just fear
mongering. Big tech is is causing harm
to humans or stealing your data, all
that kind of stuff. There is is more
complicated than that. And you're right.
There's a very large number of people
inside these companies, many of which
you know, many of which I know, that
deeply care about helping people. They
are considering the full human
experience of people from across the
world, not just Silicon Valley, people
across the United States, people across
the world, what that means, what their
needs are. It's really difficult to
design this one system
that is able to help all these different
kinds of people across the different age
groups, cultures, mental states, mental
conditions, all that kind of stuff.
>> I wish that the timing of AI was
different with the relationship of Big
Tech to the average person. So, like Big
Tech's reputation was so low, and with
how AI is so expensive, it's like
inevitably going to be a Big Tech thing
where it takes so many resources, and
people say that the US is
betting the economy on AI with this
buildout. And it's like to have these be
intertwined at the same time is just
makes for such a hard communication
environment. It'd be good for me to go
talk to more people in the world that
hate Big Tech and see AI as a
continuation of this.
>> And one of the things you actually
recommend,
one of the antidotes that you you talk
about,
is
uh to find agency in this whole system,
as opposed to sort of sitting back in a
powerless way and consuming the AI slop
as it quickly, rapidly takes over the
internet. More, find agency by using AI
to build stuff, build apps, build
So, you one that actually helps you
build intuition, but two, it's
empowering because you you can
understand how it works, what the
weaknesses are, and it allows you gives
you a voice power to say like this is
fucked up, this is bad, this is bad use
of the technology, and this is good use
of the technology.
And you're more plugged into the system
then, so you can understand it better,
and you can steer it better as
as as it goes.
>> I think that's a good point you brought
up agency instead of ignoring it and
saying, "Okay, I'm not going to use it."
I think it's probably long-term
healthier to say, "Okay, it's out there.
I can't put it back." You know, like
internet, computers back then when they
came out.
How do I make best use of it, and how
does it help me to up-level myself? The
one thing I worry here though is like if
you just fully use it for something you
love to do, then the thing you love to
do is not no longer there and that could
potentially I feel like lead to burnout.
For example, if I use an LM to do all my
coding for me, now there's no coding.
I'm just managing something that is
coding for me. 2 years
let's say later if I just do that 8
hours a day,
have something coded for me,
do I feel fulfilled still like is this
like
Yeah, I mean is this just like
hurting me in terms of being excited
about my job, excited about what I'm
doing? Am I still proud to build
something?
>> So there's a on that topic of enjoyment
is is quite interesting we should just
throw this in there that there is this
recent survey of about 791 professional
developers professional meaning 10 plus
years of experience. That's a long time.
>> Yeah.
>> What's a junior developer?
>> Uh yeah in this day and age. Uh so the
the results here in many fronts are
uh surprising. So they break it down by
junior and senior developers, but I mean
it just shows
that both junior and senior developers
use AI generated code in code they ship.
So this is not just for fun sort of
intermediate kind of learning things.
This is code they ship. And so it's 25%
mean like most of them use around 50% or
more. And what's interesting is for the
category of over 50% of your code that
you ship is AI generated, senior
developers are much more likely to do
so. But you don't want AI to take away
the thing you love.
>> Yeah.
>> I think it speaks to my experience these
particular results I'm about to say. So
together about 80% of people find it
either somewhat more enjoyable or
significantly more enjoyable to use AI
as part of the work.
>> I think it It on the task. Um for my
personal
usage, for example,
I have a website where I sometimes tweak
things on the website. I personally
don't enjoy this. So, in that sense, if
the AI can help me to implement
something on my website, I'm all here
for it. It's It's great.
But then, at the same time, when I solve
a complex problem,
well, if there's a bug and I hunt this
bug and I find the bug, it's the best
feeling in the world. It's like you get
so much joy, like oh, it's like you feel
like great. But now, if you don't even
think about thinking about the bug, you
just go directly to the LLM, well, you
never have this kind of feeling, right?
But then, there could be the middle
ground where, well, you try yourself,
you can't find it, you use the LLM, and
then you don't get frustrated because it
helps you and you move on to something
that you enjoy. And so, I think looking
at these statistics, I think also the
difference is or what is not factored in
is averaging over all the different
scenarios where
we don't So, we don't know if it's for
the core task or if it's for something
mundane that people would not have
enjoyed otherwise. So, in a sense, AI is
really great for doing mundane things
that
um, take a lot of work. So, for example,
my wife the other day, she has like a
podcast for like book like book
discussions, a book club, and she was
like transferring the show notes from
Spotify to YouTube. And then the links
somehow broke. And she had in some
episodes, because they discuss many
books, like 100 links or something.
It would have been really painful to go
in there and fix each link manually. And
so, I suggested, "Hey, let's try
ChatGPT." We copied the text into
ChatGPT and it fixed them. And
instead of 2 hours going from link to
link fixing that, you know, it made that
type of work much more seamless. There
was no frustration. Fixed I think
everyone has a use case where AI is
useful for something like that that
would be really boring, really mundane.
>> I, for me personally, since we're
talking about coding,
uh, and you mentioned debugging, I would
a lot of the source of the enjoyment for
me uh, on the more on the cursor side
than the Claude code side
is the I have a friend. I have a co-
What's that called? A pair programmer.
Like I it's less lonely. You you made
debugging sound like this great joy. No,
I would say I would say debugging is
like a drink of water after you've been
going through a desert
for days. So, like you're you skip the
whole desert part where you're
suffering. So, like there sometimes it's
nice to have a friend who's who's can't
really find the bug, but can give you
some intuition about the code and you're
together
with that friend going through the
desert and then together find that drink
of water. So, I at least for me uh maybe
it speaks to the loneliness of the
programming experience. It's it that is
a source of joy.
>> It's maybe also related to delayed
gratification. I'm a person who, you
know, as a even as a kid, I like the
idea of Christmas presents having them,
getting them better than actually
getting the presents. I would look
forward to the day I get the presents,
but then it's over and I'm disappointed.
And maybe it's something like also with,
let's say, food. I think food tastes
better when you're really hungry.
And with Yeah, you're right. With
debugging, it is not always, you know,
great. It's like often frustrating. But
um
then there if you can solve it, then
it's great. But there's also like a
sweet Goldilocks zone. If it's too hard,
then it's, you know,
wasting your time. But I think that is
another challenge, though. How will
people learn? I mean, the chart we
looked at um
we saw that more senior developers are
shipping more AI-generated code than the
junior ones. And I think it's a very
interesting because intuitively you
would think it's the junior developers
because
they don't know, let's say, how to do
the thing yet because they are more
junior. And so, they use AI to do that
thing. It could either mean the AI is
not good enough yet to solve that task,
but it could also mean
experts are more effective at using it.
They know
where and better to how to use it and
review the code, and they trust the code
then more. And so I think
one issue in the society in the future
will be though how do you become an
expert if you never try to do the thing
yourself? And I think one way that's
always like for me how how I learn is by
trying things myself. Like math
textbooks, if you look at the solutions,
yeah, you learn something, but I think
you learn actually better if you try
first, and then you appreciate the
solution differently because you know
how to put it into your mental
framework. And um if LLMs are here all
the time,
would you actually go through the length
at struggling? Would you
be willing to struggle because struggle
is not nice, right? I mean, it's
struggling. And
if you use the LLM to do everything, at
some point you will never really take
the next step, and then
you will maybe not get that unlock that
you would get as an expert using an LLM.
So, it's like, you know, it's like I
think there's like a Goldilocks sweet
spot where maybe maybe the trick here is
you make dedicated offline time where
you study 2 hours a day, and the rest of
the day use LLMs. But I I think it's
important also for people to still
invest in themselves, in my opinion, to
not just, you know, LLM everything.
>> Yeah, there is in our weak together
civilization that we each individually
have to find that Goldilocks zone.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh and in the programming context as
developers. Now, we've had this
fascinating conversation that started
with pre-training and mid-training.
Let's get to post-training.
A lot of fun stuff in post-training. So,
what are some of the interesting ideas
in post-training?
>> The biggest one from 2025 is learning
this reinforcement learning with
verifiable rewards. You can scale up the
training there, which means doing a lot
of this kind of iterative generate grade
loop, and that lets the models learn
both interesting behaviors on the tool
use and software side. This could be
searching, running commands on their own
and seeing the outputs, and then also
that training enables this inference
time scaling very nicely. And it just
turned out that this
paradigm was very nicely linked in this,
where it's this kind of RL training
enables inference time scaling, but
inference time scaling could have been
found in different ways. So, it was kind
of this perfect storm of the models
change a lot in the way that they're
trained
is a major factor in doing so, and this
has changed
how people approach post-training
dramatically.
>> RLVR popularized by DeepSeek R1?
Can you describe how it works?
>> Yeah, fun fact, um, I was on the team
that came up with the term RLVR, which
is from our 2003 work before DeepSeek,
which is we don't take a lot of credit
for the being the people to popularize
the scaling RL, but as fun as
what academics get as an aside, is the
ability to name and influence the
discourse, because like closed labs can
only say so much, but one of the things
you can do as an academic is like you
might not have the compute to train the
the model, but you can frame things in a
way that ends up being I describe it as
like a community can come together
around this RLVR term, which is very
fun. And then DeepSeek is the people
that did the training breakthrough,
which is they scaled the reinforcement
learning, which was you have the model
generate answers and then grade the
completion if it was right, and then
that accuracy is your reward for
reinforcement learning. So,
reinforcement learning is classically an
agent that acts in an environment, and
the environment gives it a state and the
and a reward back, and you try to
maximize this reward. In the case of
language models, the reward is normally
accuracy on a set of verifiable tasks,
whether it's math problems, coding
tasks, and it starts to get blurry with
things like
factual domains, like that is also in
some ways verifiable, or constraints on
your instruction like respond only with
words that start with A. Like all of
these things are verifiable in some way
and the core idea of this is you find a
lot more of these problems that are
verifiable and you let the model try it
many times while taking these RL steps
these RL
gradient updates. The infrastructure
evolved from this reinforcement learning
from human feedback where in that era
the score they were trying to optimize
was a learned reward model of aggregate
human preferences. So you kind of change
the problem domains and that let the
optimization go on to much bigger scales
which kind of kick-started a major
change in what the models can do and how
people use them.
>> What kind of domains is
RLVR amenable to?
>> Math and code are the famous ones and
then there's a lot of
work kind of on what is called a rubrics
which is related to word people might
have heard as LM as a judge which is
like for each problem I'll have a set of
problems in my training data set. I'll
then have another language model and ask
it what would a good answer to this
problem look like and then you could try
the problem a bunch of times over and
over again and assign a score based on
this rubric. So it's not necessarily
verifiable like a math and code domain
but this rubrics idea and other
scientific problems that it might be a
little bit more vague is where a lot of
the attention is where they're trying to
push this set of methods into these kind
of
more open-ended domains where the models
can learn a lot more.
>> I think that's called reinforcement
learning with AI feedback, right?
>> That's the older term from it that was
coined in Anthropic's Constitutional AI
paper.
So it's like a lot of these things come
in cycles.
>> Also just one step back for the RLVR. So
I think the interesting beautiful thing
here is that you you ask the LM let's
say a math question and then you know
the correct answer and you let the LM
like you said figure it out but how it
does it I mean you don't really
constrain it much. There are some
constraints you can add like use the
same language, don't switch between
Spanish and English, but let's say
you're pretty much hands-off. You only
give the question and the answer, and
then the LM has to, you know, just the
task to arrive at the right answer. But
the beautiful thing here is what happens
in practice is that the LM will do a
step-by-step description, like, you
know, like as a student or like as a
Yeah, mathematician, how you would
derive the solution. It will give you It
will use those steps, and that helps
actually the model to
improve its own accuracy. And then, like
you said, the inference scaling. So,
inference scaling loosely means
basically spending more compute during
using the LM during inference. And here
the inference scaling is
that the model would use more tokens.
And and also, I think in the R1 paper,
they showed the longer they train the
model, the longer the responses are.
They they grow over time. They use more
tokens, so it becomes more expensive. It
becomes more expensive for simple tasks,
but these explanations, they help the
model with the accuracy. There are also
interesting a lot of papers showing what
the model explains does not necessarily
have to be correct, or it maybe is even
unrelated to the answer, but for some
reason it still helps the model. Like
this is the fact that it is um
explaining. And I think it's also Again,
I don't want to anthropomorphize these
LLMs, but it's kind of like how we
humans operate, right? If there's a
complex math problem, let's say in a
math class, you usually have a note
paper and you do it step-by-step. You
cross out things, and the model also
self-corrects. And that that was I think
the aha moment in the R1 paper. They
called it aha moment because the model
itself recognized it made a mistake and
then said, "Ah, I did something wrong,
and so let me try." And I think that's
just so cool that this falls out of just
giving it the correct answer and having
it figure out how to do it, that it kind
of does, in a sense, what a human would
do. Although LLMs don't think like
humans, it's kind of like an interesting
coincidence. And And the the other side
nice side effect is it's great for us
humans often to see these steps. It
builds trust, but also we learn we can
double-check things.
>> There's a lot in here. I think some of
the debate There's been a lot of debate
this year on if the language models like
these aha I think the aha moments are
kind of fake because in pre-training you
essentially have seen the whole
internet. So, you have definitely seen
people explaining their work even even
verbally, like a transcript of a math
lecture. You try this, oh I messed this
up. And what reinforcement learning is
this RLRV is very good at doing is
amplifying these behaviors cuz they're
very useful in enabling the model to
think longer and to check its work. And
I agree that it is very beautiful that
this training kind of the model learns
to amplify this in a way that is just so
useful at the final answers being
better.
>> I can give you also hands-on example. I
was training the Qwen 3 base model with
RLRV on math 500. The base model had an
accuracy of about 15%. Just 50 steps
like in a few minutes with RLRV, the
model went from 15% to 50% accuracy. And
the model you can't tell me it's
learning anything about fundamentally
about math in
>> The Qwen example is weird cuz there's
been two papers this year, one of which
I was on that talks about data
contamination in Qwen and specifically
that they trained on a lot of this
special mid-training phase that we like
a minute on
>> It's the that's weird.
>> is they trained on problems that are
almost identical to that.
>> Exactly. And so, you can see that
basically the RL it's not teaching the
model any new knowledge about math. You
can't that in 50 steps. So, the
knowledge is already there in the
pre-training, you're just unlocking it.
>> I still disagree with the kind of
premise cuz there's a lot of weird
complexities that you can't prove
because
one of the things that points to
weirdness is that if you take the Qwen 3
so-called base model and you can you
could Google on the screen, you could
Google like math data set hugging face
and you could take a problem and what
you do if you put it into Qwen 3 base
the all these math problems have words.
So, it'll be like Alice has five apples
and takes but and gives three to whoever
and there are these word problems. With
these Qwen base models, why people are
suspicious of them is if you change the
numbers but keep the words Qwen will
produce like a very high debt with
without tools will produce a very high
accuracy like decimal representation of
the answer. Which means there's some
like at sometime it was shown problems
that were almost identical to the test
set. And it was using tools to get a
very high precision answer. But a
language model without tools will never
actually have this. So, it's kind of
been this big debate in the research
community is like how much of these
reinforcement learning papers that are
training on Qwen and measuring
specifically on this like math benchmark
where there's been multiple papers
talking about contamination. It's like
how much can you believe them? And I
think this is what caused the reputation
of RL VR being about formatting. Because
you can get these gains so quickly and
therefore it must already be in the
model. But there's a lot of complexity
here that it's not really like
controlled experimentation.
>> Yep. So, we don't really know.
But if it weren't true, I would say
distillation wouldn't work, right? I
mean distillation can work to some
extent, but the thing is that is I think
the biggest problem in LLM research this
contamination because we don't know
what's in the data. It's unless you have
a new data set it is really impossible.
And the same you mentioned
math the math data set which is you have
a question and then answer and an
explanation is given. But then also even
something simpler like MMLU which is a
multiple-choice benchmark. If you just
change the format slightly um like I
don't know you
use
a dot instead of a parenthesis or
something like that. The model accuracy
will vastly differ.
>> I think that that could be like a model
issue rather than a general issue.
>> It's not even malicious by the
developers of the LLM like hey, we want
to cheat at the benchmark. It's just it
has seen something at some point and I
think the only fair way to evaluate an
LLM is to have a new benchmark that is
after the cut-off date when the LLM was
deployed.
>> Can we lay out what would be the sort of
the recipe of all the things that would
be going to post training and you
mentioned RLVR was a really exciting
effective thing. Maybe we should
elaborate. RLHF still has a really
important component to play. What kind
of other ideas are there on post
training?
>> I think you can kind of take this in
order. I think you could
view it as what made 01 which was this
first reasoning model possible or what
will the latest model be and they
actually have you're going to have
similar interventions at these where you
start with mid-training and the
thing that is rumored to enable 01 and
similar models is really careful data
curation where you're providing a broad
set of like what is called reasoning
traces which is just the model
generating words in a forward process
that is reflecting like breaking down a
problem into intermediate steps and
trying to solve them. So at mid-training
you need to have
data that is similar to this to make it
so that when you move into post training
primarily with this verifiable rewards
it can learn. And then what is happening
today is you're
figuring out which problems to give the
model and how long you can train it for
and like how much inference you can
enable the model to use when solving
these verifiable problems. So as models
get better certain problems
are no longer like the model will solve
them 100% of the time and therefore
there's very little signal in this. If
we pull if we look at the GRPO equation,
this one is famous for this because
essentially the reward given to the
agent is based on how good a given
action action as a completion is
relative to the other answers to the
same problem. So if all the problems get
the same answer, there's no signal in
these types of algorithms. So what
they're doing is they're finding harder
problems which is why you hear about
things like scientific domains which is
like that's so hard like getting
anything right there. If you have a lab
or something, it just generated so many
tokens or much harder software problems.
So, the
frontier models are all pushing into
these harder domains and they can train
on more problems and the model will
learn more skills at once.
The RLHF link to this is kind of like
RLHF has been and still is kind of like
the finishing touch on the models where
it makes the models more useful
by improving the organization or style
or tone. There's different things that
resonates to different audiences. Like
some people like a really quirky model
and RLHF could be good at enabling that
personality.
And some people hate this like markdown
bulleted list thing that the models do,
but it's actually really good for
quickly parsing information. And RLHF,
this human feedback stage is really
great for
just get putting this into the model at
the end of the day. So, it's what it
made ChatGPT so magical for people. And
that use has actually remained fairly
stable.
This formatting can also help
the models get better at math problems,
for example. So, it's like
the border between style and formatting
and like the method that you use to
answer a problem is actually um they're
all very closely linked in terms of when
you're training these models, which is
why RLHF can still say make a model
better at math, but these verifiable
domains are much more direct process to
doing this because it's kind of
makes more sense with the problem
formulation, which is why it kind of
ends up all forming together. But to
summarize, it's like mid-training is
give the model the skills it needs to
then learn.
RL and verifiable rewards is let the
model try a lot of times. So, put a lot
of compute into trial and error learning
across hard problems. And then RLHF
would be like finish the model, make it
easy to use, and kind of just round the
model out.
>> Can you comment on the amount of
computer required for RLVR?
>> It's only gone up and up, so I think
Grok 4
was famous for saying they use a similar
amount of compute for pre-training and
post-training. Back to the scaling
discussion, they involve very different
hardware for scaling. Pre-training is
very compute bound, which is like this
flops discussion, which is just how many
matrix multiplications can you get
through in one time? And because RL
you're generating these answers, you're
trying the model in the real world
environments, it ends up being much more
memory bound because you're generating
long sequences, and the attention
mechanisms have this behavior where you
get a quadratic increase in memory
as you're getting to longer sequences.
So, the compute becomes very different.
So, you when in pre-training we would
talk about a model, I think if we go
back to like the Biden administration
executive order, it's like 10 to the
25th flops to train a model. And if
you're using flops in post-training,
it's a lot weirder because the reality
is just like how many hours are you
allocating, how many GPUs for.
And I think in terms of time, the RL
compute is getting much closer because
you just can't
put it all into one system. Like
pre-training is so computationally dense
where all the GPUs are talking to each
other, and it's extremely efficient.
Where RL has all these moving parts, and
it can just take a long time
to generate a sequence of 100,000
tokens. Like if you think about GPT-5.2
Pro taking an hour, it's like what if
your training run has the sample for an
hour, and you have to make it so that's
handled efficiently. So, I think in GPU
hours or just like wall clock hours, the
RL runs are probably approaching the
number of days as pre-training, but they
probably aren't using as many GPUs at
the same time. There's rules of thumb
where in labs it's like you don't want
your pre-training runs to last more than
like a month because they fail
catastrophically. And if you were
planning a huge cluster to be held for 2
months, and then it fails on day 50, the
opportunity cost is just so big. So, you
kind of don't want to just you people
don't want to put all their eggs in one
basket, which is like GPT-4 was like the
ultimate YOLO run, and nobody ever
wanted to do it before where it took
like 3 months to train, and everybody
was shocked that it worked. So, I think
people are a little bit more cautious
and incremental now. So, RL VR is more,
let's say, un- unlimited how much you
can train to get still benefit where
RLHF, because it's a preference tuning,
it you reach a certain point where it
doesn't really make sense to spend more
RL budget on that. So, just a step back
with um preference tuning. So, there are
multiple people that can give multiple,
let's say, explanations for the same
thing and they can both be correct, but
at some point you learn the certain
style and it doesn't make sense to, you
know, iterate on it. My favorite example
is like if
relatives ask me what laptop they should
buy, I give them an explanation or ask
them like, "Yeah, what is your um use
case?" Like they, for example,
prioritize battery life and storage.
Other people, like us for example, would
prioritize RAM and compute. And so, but
both both answers are correct, but
different people require different
answers. And with preference tuning,
what you're trying to average somehow,
like you are asking data labelers to
give you the right, well not the right,
the preferred answer, and then you train
on that, but at some point yeah, you
learn that average preferred answer and
there's no, I think, reason to keep
training longer on it because, you know,
it's just a style. Well, with RL VR, you
literally give the model
well, you let the model solve more and
more complex, difficult problems. And
so, I think that it makes more sense to
allocate more budget long-term to LR VR.
And also, that right now we are in LR VR
1.0 land where it's still like that
simple
thing where we have a question and
answer, but we don't do anything with
the one stuff in between. So, there was
a, I mean, multiple research papers also
by Google for example on process reward
models that also give scores for the
explanation, how correct is the
explanation. And I think that will be
the next thing, let's say, RL VR 2.0 for
this year, focusing in between question
and answer, like how to leverage that
information, the explanation to improve
the explanation and help it to get
better accuracy. But then, so that
that's one angle and there was a Deep
Seek math version two paper where they
also had interesting inference scaling
there where
first they had um
developed models that grade themselves a
separate model and I think that that
will be one aspect and the other like
Nathan mentioned that will be for our
LRVR branching into other domains.
>> The place where people are excited are
value functions which is very pretty
similar so process reward models
are kind of like process reward models
assign
how good something is to each kind of
intermediate step in a reasoning process
where value functions apply value to
every token the language model
generates.
Both of these have been largely unproven
in the
language modeling in this reasoning
model era. People are more optimistic
about value functions forever for
whatever reason now. I think process
reward models were tried a lot more in
this pre 01 pre-reasoning model era and
a lot of people had a lot of mistakes
with them. So I think a lot of it is the
human nature of like
value models have a very deep history in
reinforcement learning. They're one of
the first things that were core to like
deep reinforcement learning existing is
like training value models in this. So
right now the literature people are
excited about trying value models but
there's very little proof in it and
there are negative examples in trying to
scale up process reward models. These
things don't always hold in the future.
I think we came to this discussion by
talking about scaling and a simple way
to summarize what you're saying with
like you don't want to do too much RLHF
which is eventually the signal scales is
people have worked on RLHF for language
models for years especially in intense
interest after ChatGPT and this the
first release of a reasoning model
trained with RLVR opening eyes 01 had a
scaling plot where if you increase the
training compute logarithmically you get
a linear increase in evaluations and
this has been reproduced multiple times.
I think DeepSeek had a plot like this
but there's no scaling law for RLHF
where if you log increase the compute,
you get some performance. In fact, the
seminal scaling paper for RLHF is
scaling laws for reward model over
optimization. So, it's like that's a big
line to draw with RLVR
and the methods we have now and in the
future, like they will follow this
scaling
paradigm, which is like the best runs
you can let to run for an extra 10x and
you get a few x performance, but you
can't do this with RLHF. And that is
just going to be field defining in how
people approach them, where I
I've shilled for people academically to
do RLHF, and that's a good way to
describe it. It's like to do the best
RLHF, you might not need the extra 10 or
100x of compute, but to do the best
RLVR, you do. So, I think there's a what
I say is a seminal paper from what was a
Meta internship is called it's like the
art of scaling reinforcement learning
with language models. There
what they describe as a framework is
scale RL, and their incremental
experiment
was like 10,000 B200 hours, which is
like thousands or tens of thousands of
dollars per experiment, and they did do
a lot of them, which is just like this
cost is not accessible to the average
academic, which is a hard equilibrium,
where
it's trying to figure out how to learn
from each community.
>> I was wondering if we could take at this
point a bit of a tangent and talk about
education and learning. If you're
somebody listening to this who's a smart
person interested in programming,
interested in AI, so I presume building
something from scratch is a good
beginning.
So, can you just take me through like
what you would recommend people do?
>> So, I would personally start, like you
said, uh implementing a simple model
from scratch that you can run on your
computer. The goal is not if you build a
model from scratch to have like
something you use every day for your
personal projects. Like it's not going
to be your personal assistant replacing
an existing open weight model or
ChatGPT. It's to see what exactly goes
into the LLM, what exactly comes out of
the LLM? How the pre-training works in
that sense on your own computer
preferably.
And then
you learn about the pre-training, the
supervised fine-tuning, the attention
mechanism. You get a solid understanding
of how things work. But at some point
you will reach a limit because small
models can only do so much and the
problem with learning about LLMs at
scale is I would say it's exponentially
more complex to make a larger model
because it's not that the model just
becomes larger. You have to now think
about sharding your parameters across
multiple GPUs. Even for the KB cache
there are multiple ways you can
implement it. One is just to understand
how it works, just to grow the cache.
That's It's like a cache you grow step
by step by let's say concatenating
lists, growing it. But then that
wouldn't be optimal in GPUs. You
wouldn't do that. You would pre-allocate
a tensor and then fill it in. But that
adds again another 20-30 line lines of
code and for each thing you add so much
code. And I think the trick with the
book is basically to understand how the
LLM works. It's not going to be your
production level LLM. But once you have
that, you can understand the production
level LLM.
>> So you're trying to always build an LLM
that's going to fit on one GPU.
>> Yes, the most of them I have the I have
some bonus materials on some MoE models.
I think one of two of them they may
require multiple GPUs, but the goal is
to have it on one GPU. And the beautiful
thing is also you can self-verify. It's
almost like RLVR when you code these
from scratch, you can take an existing
model from the Hugging Face Transformer
library. Um so the Hugging Face
Transformer library is great, but if you
want to learn about LLMs, I think that's
not the best place to start because the
code is so complex because it has to
full it has to fit so many use cases.
Also some people use it in production.
It has to be really sophisticated and
it's really intertwined and really hard.
It's not linear to read.
>> It was started as a fine-tuning library
and then it grew to be like the standard
representation of every
model architecture and the way it is
loaded. So Hugging Face like the default
place to get a model and Transformers is
the software that enables it, so people
can easily load a model and do something
basic with it.
>> And all frontier labs that have open
weight models have a Hugging Face
Transformers version of it like from
Deep Seek to GPT-OSS. It's like the
canonical weights that you can load
there. But again, also even Transformers
library is not used in production.
People use then SG Lang or vLLM and it
adds another layer of complexity.
>> We should say that the Transformers
library has like 400 models.
>> So, it's a one library that tries to
implement a lot of LLMs and
so you have a huge code base basically.
It's like huge. It's like
it's I don't know, maybe millions,
hundreds of thousands of lines of code
and find it's like understanding the
part that you want to understand is
finding the needle in the haystack. But
what's beautiful about it is you have a
working implementation and so you can
work backwards from it. What I would
recommend doing or what I also do is if
I want to understand, for example, how
almost three is implemented, I would
look at the weights in the model hub,
the config file, and then you can see,
oh, they used so many layers, they use,
let's say, group query attention or
multi-head attention in that case, and
you see all the components in like a
human-readable, I don't know, 100 lines
of config file, and then you start,
let's say, with your GPT-2 model and add
these things, you know? And the cool
thing here is you can then load the
pre-trained weights and see if they work
in your model. And you want to match the
same output that you get with a
transformer model, and then you can use
that as a basically as a verifiable
reward to make your architecture
correct. And then it's kind of
sometimes it takes me a day to with
almost three, the challenge was rope for
the position embeddings. They had a yarn
extension and there was some custom
scaling there and I couldn't quite match
the these things. And in this struggle,
you kind of understand things, but the
cool thing is at the end you know you
have it correct because you can unit
test it, you can check against the
reference implementation. And I think
that's maybe one of the best ways to
learn, really, like to basically reverse
engineer something, yeah.
>> I think that that is something that
everybody that's interested in getting
to AI today should do. And I think
that's why I like your book is like I
came to language models from this RL and
robotics field. Like I've never had
taken the time to just like learn all
the fundamentals. And this transformer
architecture I describe as being like so
fundamental as like deep learning was a
thing that I had to learn in the past
and people need to do this. I think that
where a lot of people kind of get
overwhelmed is how do I apply this to
have impact or find like a career path
because
like AI and language models make this
fundamental stuff so accessible and
people with motivation will learn it.
And then it's like how do I get the
cycles on gold to
contribute to research. And I think that
I'm actually fairly optimistic in this
because the field moves so fast that a
lot of times the best people like don't
fully solve a problem because there's a
bigger lower like a bigger problem to
solve that's very low-hanging fruit, so
they move on. And I think that a lot of
what I was trying to do in this RLHF
book is like take post-training
techniques and just describe how people
think about them influencing the model
and what people are doing. And then
it's remarkable how many things I just
think are just like people stop studying
them or don't. So, I think people trying
to get narrow
after doing the fundamentals is good.
And then
reading the relevant papers and being
engaged in the ecosystem. It's like you
actually the proximity that random
people have online from the leading
researchers. Like no one knows who all
the like the anonymous account on X and
ML is very popular for whatever reason.
And no one knows who all these people
are. Like they could just be random
people that study the stuff deeply,
especially with the AI tools to just be
like keep I don't understand this, keep
digging into it. I think is a very
useful thing.
But there's a lot of research areas that
just like
are maybe three papers that you need to
read, and then one of the authors will
probably email you back, but you have to
put in a
lot of effort into these emails to
understand the field. Like, I think it
would be
for a newcomer easily weeks of work to
feel like they could truly grasp like
what is a very narrow area, area, but I
think going narrow after you have the
fundamentals be very useful to people
because
it's like I became very interested in
character training, which is like how
you make the model funny or sarcastic or
serious, and like what do you do to the
data to do this? And it's like
a student at Oxford reached out to me.
He's like, "Hey, I'm interested in
this." And I advised him. And it's like,
that paper now exists. And it's like, I
don't know, there's like two or three
people in the world that were very
interested in this. He's a PhD student,
which gives you an advantage, but like
for me, that was a topic I was waiting
for someone to be like, "Hey, I have
time to spend cycles on this." And I'm
sure there's a lot more very narrow
things or just like, "Oh, it doesn't
make sense that there was no answer to
this." And I think that it's just like
there's so much information coming that
people are like, "I can't grab on to any
of these." But, if you just actually
stick in an area, I think there's a lot
of interesting things to learn.
>> Yeah, I think you can't do try to do it
all because it would be very
overwhelming and you would burn out if
you try to keep up with everything. For
me, for example, I haven't kept up with
computer vision in a long time. I just
focused on LLMs. But, coming back to
your book, for example, I think this is
also a really great book and a really
good bang for the buck because you want
to learn about RLHF, I wouldn't go out
there and read RLHF papers because I
would be you would be spending two years
>> There's I just edited the book and I was
like, there's a chapter where I had to
be like
X papers say one thing, and X papers say
another thing, and we'll see what
becomes out to be true.
>> What are some of the just to go through
some of the table contents, some of the
ideas we might have missed in the bigger
picture of the post-training? So, first
of all, you do the problem setup,
training overview, what are preferences,
preferences data, and the optimization
tools, reward modeling, regularization,
instruction tuning, rejection sampling,
reinforcement learning, AI policy
gradients, direct alignment algorithms,
then constitutional AI and AI feedback,
reasoning and inference time scaling,
tool use and function calling, synthetic
data and distillation, evaluation, and
then open questions section, over
optimization, style and information,
and then product UX, character, and
post-training. So, what are some ideas
worth mentioning that connect both
educational component and the research
component? You mentioned the character
training, which is pretty interesting.
>> Character training is interesting cuz
there's so little out of it, but we
talked about how people engage with
these models and like
like we feel good using them because
they're positive, but that can go too
far. It could be too positive, and it's
like essentially it's how do you change
your data
and or decision-making to make it
exactly what you want. And I OpenAI has
this thing called a model spec, which is
essentially their
internal guideline for what they want
the model to do, and they publish this
to developers. So, essentially you can
know
what is a failure of OpenAI's training,
which is like they have their intentions
and they haven't met it yet, versus what
is something that they like actually
wanted to do and that you don't like.
And that transparency is very nice, but
all the methods for
curating these documents and how easy it
is to follow them is not very well
known. I think the way the book is
designed is that the reinforcement
learning chapter is obviously what
people want because everybody hears
about it with RLHF, and it's the same
algorithms and the same math, but it's
just like you can use it in in very
different documents. So, I think the
core of pref of RLHF is like how messy
preferences are.
It's essentially rehash of a paper I
wrote years ago, but this is essentially
the chapter that'll tell you why RLHF is
never ever fully solvable because like
the way that even RL is set up is that
um it assumes that preferences can be
quantified and that multiple preferences
can be reduced to a single values. And I
think it relates in the economics
literature to the Von Neumann
Morgenstern utility theorem. And like
that is the chapter where all of that
philosophical, economic, and like
psychological context. It tells you what
gets compressed into doing RLHF. So it's
like you have all of this and then at
the end later in the book it's like you
use this RL math to make the number go
up. And I think that that's why I think
it would be very rewarding for people to
do research on is because it's like
quantifying preferences is something
that is just like
humans have designed the problem in
order to make preferences studyable. But
there's kind of fundamental debates on
like
an example is in a language model
response you have different things you
care about whether it's accuracy or in
style. And when you're collecting the
data they all get compressed into like a
I like this more than another. And it's
like like that is happening and there's
a lot of philoso- there's a lot of
research in other areas of the world
that go into like how should you
actually do this? I think social choice
theory is the
subfield of economics around how you
should aggregate preferences.
And there's like I was I went to a
workshop that published a white paper on
like how can you think about using
social choice theory for RLHF?
So I mostly would want people that get
excited about the math to come and have
things where they can stumble into and
learn this kind of broader context. I
think there's a fun thing I just keep a
list of all the tech reports that I like
of reasoning models. So in the
in chapter 14 which is just a kind of
like a short summary of RLVR there's
just like a gigantic table where I just
like list every single reasoning model
that I like. So there's just like I
think in education a lot of it needs to
be like
at this point it's like what I like
because the language models are so good
at the math where it's like famous paper
direct preference optimization which is
like a much simpler way of pro- solving
the problem than RL. Um, the derivations
in the appendix skip steps of math. And
it's like I tried for this book like I
redid the derivations and I'm like, what
the heck is this log trick that they
used to change the math? But doing it
with language models, they're like, this
is the log trick. And I'm like,
I don't know if I like this that the
math is so commoditized. I think like
some of the struggle in reading this
appendix and following the math, I think
is
good for learning and I
>> Yeah, so we're actually returning to
this often just on the topic of
education. You both both have brought up
the word struggle Mhm, quite a bit. So
there is value. If you're not struggling
as part of this process,
you're not fully following the the
proper process for learning, I suppose.
>> Some of the providers are starting to
work on models for education, which are
designed to not give actually I haven't
used them, but I would guess they're
designed to not give all the information
at once
>> Right.
>> and make people work to do this. So I
think you could train models to do this
and it would be a wonderful
contribution. We're like all of this
stuff in the book, you have to
re-evaluate every decision for it, which
is such a great example. And I think
there's there's a chance to work on it
at AI2, which I which I was like, oh, I
think this would be so cool.
>> Makes sense. I do something like that.
Did that the other day for video games,
for example. I sometimes for my pastime
play video games. Like I like
video games with puzzles. So you know,
like Zelda and Metroid. And there's this
new game where I got stuck and I really
got stuck and I was okay, I you know, I
don't want to struggle like two two days
and so I used an LLM. But then you say,
hey, please don't add any spoilers. Just
you know, I'm here and there. What do I
have to do next? And the same thing you
can do, I guess, for math where you say,
okay, I'm here at this point. I'm
getting stuck. Don't give me the full
solution, but what is something I could
try, you know, like where you kind of
carefully probe it. But the problem here
is I think it requires discipline and a
lot of people do math for I mean, there
are a lot of people who enjoy math, but
there are also a lot of people who need
to do it for their homework. And then
it's like the shortcut. And yeah, we can
develop an educational LLM, but the
other LLM is still and there's still a
temptation to use the other LLMs.
>> I think a lot of people, especially in
college, they they understand the stuff
they're passionate about, they're
self-aware about it, and they understand
it shouldn't be easy. Like I think we
just have to develop a good taste.
>> Mhm.
>> What research taste, like school taste,
about stuff that you should be
struggling on, and stuff you shouldn't
be struggling on, which is tricky to
know, cuz sometimes you don't have good
um
long-term vision about what will be
actually useful to you in your career.
But you have to you have to be develop
that taste, yeah.
>> I was talking to my
fiance or friends about this, and it's
like there's this brief 10-year window
where all of the homework and all of the
exams could be digital, but before that
everybody had to do all the exams in
blue book, cuz there was no other way.
And now after AI, everybody's going to
need to be in blue books and oral exams,
cuz everybody could cheat so easily.
It's like this brief generation that had
a different
education system that like everything
could be digital, and but you still
couldn't cheat, and now it's just going
to go back. But it's just really funny.
>> You mentioned character training, just
zooming out on on a more general topic.
For that topic, how much compute was
required? And in general, to contribute
as a researcher,
are there places where not too much
compute is required where you can
actually contribute as an individual
researcher?
>> For on the character training thing, I
think this research is built on
fine-tuning about 7 billion parameter
models with Laura, which is like a
essentially you only fine-tune a small
subset of the weights of the model. I
don't know exactly how many
GPU hours that would take,
>> but it's doable.
>> Not doable for every academic. So the
situation for some academics is like so
dire that the only work you can do is
doing inference, where you have closed
models or open models, and you get
completions from them, and you can look
at them and understand the models. And
that's very well suited to evaluation,
which you become you want to be the best
at creating representative problems that
the models fail on or show certain
abilities, which I think that you can
break through with this. So, I have
like I think that the
top end goal for a researcher working on
evaluation, if you want to have career
momentum, is the frontier labs pick up
your evaluation. So, it's like you don't
need to have every project do this, but
if you go from a small university with
no compute and you figure out something
that Claude struggles with and then the
next Claude model has it in the blog
post. Like, there there's your career
rocket ship. I think that that's hard,
but it's like if you want to scope the
maximum possible impact with minimum
compute, it's something like that, which
is just get very narrow
and it takes learning of where the
models are going. So, you need to like
build a tool that tests where not Claude
4.5 will fail. If you're going to do a
research If I'm going to start a
research project, I need to think where
the models in 8 months are going to be
struggling.
>> But, what about developing totally novel
ideas?
>> This is a trade-off. I think that if
you're doing a PhD, you could also be
like it's too risky to work in language
models. I'm going way longer term, which
is like what is
what is the thing that's going to define
language model development in 10 years,
which I think that I end up being a
person that's pretty practical. I mean,
I went to my PhD where it's like, "I got
into Berkeley. Worst case, I get a
master's and then I go work in tech."
It's like I'm very practical about it.
So, I'm like
the life afforded to people to work at
these AI companies, the amount of like
opening eyes average compensation is
over a million dollars in stock a year
for employee.
Any normal person in the US, to get into
this AI lab is transformative for your
life. So, I'm pretty practical of like
there's still a lot of upward mobility
working in language models if you're
focused and the outcome is like look at
these jobs. But, from a research
perspective, the transformative impact
in these
academic awards is like be the next Yann
LeCun is from not working on not caring
about language model development very
much.
>> It's a big financial sacrifice in that
case.
>> So, I get to work with some awesome
students and they're like, "Should I go
work in an AI lab?" And I'm like, "Like,
you're getting a PhD at a top school or
you're going to leave to go to a lab?"
I'm like, "I don't know. Like, if you go
work at a top lab, I don't blame you.
Don't go work at some random startup
that might go to zero. But, if you're
going to OpenAI, I'm like,
it could be worth leaving a PhD for."
>> Let's more rigorously think through
this. Where would you give a
recommendation for people to do a
research contribution? So, the options
are academia, so get get a PhD,
spend 5 years publishing.
Computer resources are constrained.
There's uh
there's research labs that are more
focused on open weight models.
And
so, working there or
closed
frontier labs, research labs.
The OpenAI, Anthropic, Axiom.
>> Um the two gradients are the more
closed, the more money you tend to get.
And but, also the
you get less credit. So, in terms of
building
a
like, a portfolio of things that you've
done, like, it's very clear of what you
have done as an academic. And you have
done this. And versus if you are going
to go be
like, trade this
fairly reasonable progression for being
a cog in the machine, which could also
be very fun. So, I think it's a very
different career paths. But, the
like, the opportunity cost for being a
researcher is very cuz PhD students are
paid essentially nothing. So, I think it
ends up rewarding people that have a
fairly stable safety net and they
realize that they can operate in the
long term, which is they want to do very
interesting work and get a very
interesting job. So, it is a fairly
like, it is a privileged position to be
like, "I'm going to see out my PhD and
figure it out after because I want to do
this." And I think a lot of acade- like,
at the same time, the academic ecosystem
is getting bombarded by funding getting
cut and stuff. So, there's just like so
many different trade-offs where I
understand plenty of people that are
like, "Oh, I'm drawing a I can't deal
with this funding search. I grant got
cut for no reason by the government." or
I don't know what's going to happen. So,
I think there's a lot of
uncertainty and trade-offs that in my
opinion favor just like
take the
take the well-paying job with meaningful
impact. It's like not also like you're
getting paid to sit around at OpenAI.
You're building like the cutting edge of
things that are
>> Mhm.
>> changing millions of people's
relationship to tech.
>> But publication-wise, they're being more
secretive, increasingly so. So, you're
publishing less and less and less and
less. And so, you're you are having a uh
positive impact at scale,
but it's you're a cog in the machine.
>> I think it's honestly it hasn't changed
that much. Uh so, I I've been in
academia. I'm not in academia anymore.
At the same time, I wouldn't want to
miss my time in academia. But what I
wanted to say before I get to that part,
I think it hasn't changed that much. I
was working in I was using AI on machine
learning methods for applications in
computational biology with
collaborators. And
a lot of people went from academia
directly to Google. And I think it's the
same thing. Back then, the professors
were like, you know, sad that their
students went into
industry because they couldn't carry on
their legacy in that sense. And I think
it's the same thing. It's like it hasn't
changed I think that much. The only
thing that has changed is the scale. But
you know,
cool stuff was always developed in
industry that was closed you couldn't
talk about it. And I think the
difference now is
well, your preference. Do you like to
talk about your work, publish, or you
know, you you are more in a closed lab.
Uh
the that's one difference, the
compensation of course, but it's always
been like that, I think. So, it really
depends on you know, where you feel
comfortable. And it's also nothing is
forever. The only thing right now is
there is a third option, which is
starting a startup. That's a lot of
people doing startups.
Very risky move,
but can be high is a high risk high
reward type of situation where joining
an industry lab I think is pretty safe,
you know, also upward mobility.
Honestly, I think if once you have been
at a industry lab, it will be easier to
find future jobs. But then again, you
know, you know, it's like
Yeah, how much do you enjoy the team and
working on proprietary things versus how
do you like the publishing work? I mean,
publishing is stressful. It is
you know, like
acceptance rate at conferences can be
arbitrary, can be very frustrating, but
also high reward. If you have a paper
published, you feel good because your
name is on there, you have a high
accomplishment and you know,
>> I feel like my friends who are
professors seem on average happier than
my friends who work at a frontier lab,
to be totally honest. Cuz it's just
grounding and the frontier labs
definitely do this 996, which
essentially is shorthand for work all
the time.
>> Can you describe 996 as culture that's I
believe you could say invented in China
and adopted in Silicon Valley. What's
what's 996? It's 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
>> and six days a week.
>> Six days a week. What is that? 72 hours?
Okay. So what is this basically the
standard
in AI companies in Silicon Valley?
More and more this kind of grind
mindset.
>> Yeah, I mean not maybe not exactly like
that, but I think there is a trend
towards it. And it's interesting, I
think it almost
flipped because when I was in academia,
I felt like that because as a professor
you had to write grants, you had to do
you had to teach and you had to do your
research. It's like three jobs in one
and it is more than a full-time job if
you want to be successful. And
I feel like now like Nathan just said,
the professors
in comparison to a lab, I think they
have less like even maybe pressure or
workload than at a frontier lab because
>> They work a lot. They're just so
fulfilled by working with students and
having a constant runway of mentorship
and like a mission that is very
people-oriented. I think in an era when
things are moving very fast and very
chaotic, it's very rewarding to people.
>> Yeah, and I think at a startup, I think
there's this pressure. It's like
you have to make it and it's like it is
really important that people put in the
time, but well, it is really hard
because you have to deliver constantly
and I've been at a startup. I had a good
time, but I don't know if I could do it
forever. It's like a interesting pace
and exactly like we talked about in the
beginning.
These models are leapfrogging each other
and they are just constantly
like trying to take the next step
compared to the competitors. It's just
ruthless, I think.
>> I think this leapfrogging nature and
having multiple players is actually an
underrated driver of language modeling
process where competition is so deeply
ingrained
to people and these companies have
intentionally created very strong
culture. Like Anthropic is known to be
so culturally like
deeply committed and organized. I mean,
like we hear so little from them and
everybody at Anthropic seems very
aligned and it's like
being at a culture that is super
tight and having this competitive
dynamic is like talk about a thing
that's going to make you work hard and
create things that are better. So, I
think that this But that comes at the
cost of human capital, which is like you
can only do this for so long and people
are definitely burning out. I think I
I wrote a post on burnout where I was
like I've tried in and out of this
myself, especially trying to like be a
manager of full mode training. It's a
crazy job doing this.
The book Apple in China by Patrick
McGee, he talked about the how hard the
Apple engineers worked to set up the
supply chains in China and he was like
they had saving marriage programs and he
told in a a
podcast he was like people died from
this level of working hard. So I think
this is like
it's a perfect environment for creating
progress based on human expense and I
it's there's going to be a lot there's a
lot of the human expense is the 996 that
we started this with which is like
people do really grind.
>> I also read this book I think they had a
code word for if someone had to go home
to spend time with their family to save
the marriage and it's crazy that then
colleagues will say okay this is like
red alert for this situation we have to
let that person go home this weekend and
but at the same time I don't think they
were forced to work. It's really they
were so passionate about the product I
guess that it is it is you get into that
mindset and I I had that sometimes as an
academic but also as an independent
person I have that sometimes I over work
and it's unhealthy. I had you know I had
back issues and neck issues because I
did not take the breaks that I maybe
should have taken but it's not because
no one forced me to it's because I
wanted to work because it's healthy.
>> AI and Anthropic are like they want to
do this work.
>> Yeah but there's also there's also a
feeling of fervor that's building
especially in Silicon Valley aligned
with the scaling laws idea where there's
this hype where the world will be
transformed on a scale of weeks and you
want to be at the center of it and then
you know
I'm I have this great fortune
of having conversations with wide
variety of human beings and from there I
get to see all these bubbles and echo
chambers across the world and it's
fascinating to see how we humans form
them and I think it's fair to say that
Silicon Valley is a kind of echo chamber
a kind of
silo and bubble. I think bubbles are
actually really useful
and effective. It's not necessarily a
negative thing cuz it could be ultra
productive. It could be the the Steve
Jobs
reality distortion field cuz you just
convince each other the breakthroughs
are imminent, and by convincing each
other of that, you make the
breakthroughs imminent.
>> Burn Hobart wrote a book classifying
bubbles, but essentially one of them is
financial bubbles, which is like
speculation, which is bad. And the other
one is, like, I don't know the term, but
effectively for build-outs, because it
pushes people to build these things. And
I do think AI is in this, but I worry
about it transitioning to a financial
bubble, which is, like, it's
>> Yeah, but also in the space of ideas,
that bubble
you are doing a reality distortion
field, and that means you are deviating
from reality. And if you go too far from
reality
while also working, you know, 996, and
you you might miss some fundamental
aspects of the human experience,
including in Silicon Valley, and this is
a common problem in Silicon Valley. It's
like
it's a very specific geographic area.
You might not understand the Midwest
perspective, the full
experience of all the other different
humans in the United States and across
the world, and you and you speak a
certain way to each other, you convince
each other of a certain thing. And that
that can get you into real trouble,
whether AI is a big success and becomes
a powerful technology
or it's not. In either trajectory, you
can get yourself into trouble. So, you
have to consider all of that. Here you
are, a young person trying to decide
what you want to do with your life.
>> The thing that is I don't even really
understand this, but the SFAI memes have
gotten to the point where permanent
underclass was one of them, which was
the idea that the last 6 months of 2025
was the only time to build a durable
value in AI startup or model, otherwise
all the value will be captured by
existing companies, and you will
therefore be poor. Which
like that's an example of the SF thing
that goes so far. I still think for
young people that going to be able to
tap into it, if you are really
passionate about wanting to have a
impact in AI, like being physically in
SF is the most likely place where you're
going to do this, but it has it has
trade-offs.
>> I think SF is an incredible place.
But there is a bit of a bubble. And if
you go into that bubble, which is
extremely valuable,
just get out also. Read history books,
read literature,
uh visit other places in the world.
Twitter is not and Substack is not the
entire world.
>> I think I would say it One of my One of
people I worked with is moving to SF and
it's like I need to get him a copy of
the Season of the Witch, which is a
history of SF from like 1960 to 1985,
which goes through like the hippie revo-
revolution, like they all the
um gays kind of taking over the city and
that culture emerging, and then the HIV
AIDS crisis and other things. And it's
just like that is so recent and so much
turmoil and hurt, but also like love in
SF. And it's like no one knows about
this. It's a great book, Season of the
Witch. I recommend it. A bunch of my SF
friends were
who do and kind of all recommended it to
me and I think that is just like
living there like I lived there and I
didn't appreciate this context and it's
just like
so recent.
>> Yeah.
Okay, let's uh we talked a lot about we
talked a lot about a lot of things.
Uh
certainly about the things that were
exciting last year, but this year uh one
of the things you guys mentioned is
exciting is uh the scaling of
text-to-image models and just a
different exploration of text-to-image.
Can you talk about what that is and what
the possibility holds? Sort of different
kinds of approaches than the current
LLMs.
>> Yeah, so we talked a lot about the
transformer architecture and the
autoregressive transformer architecture
specifically like GPT. And it doesn't
mean no one else is working on anything
else. So people are always on the let's
say lookout for the next big thing
because I think it would be almost like
um yeah, stupid not to because sure,
right now the transformer architecture
is the thing and it works best and has
right now nothing else out there but you
know it's always a good idea to not put
all your eggs into one basket. So people
are developing other things alternatives
to the auto regressive transformer. One
of them would be for example a text
diffusion models and listeners may know
diffusion models from the image
generation like stable diffusion
popularized it. It was like a paper on
generating images back then people use
GANs the generative adversarial networks
and then there was this diffusion
process where you iteratively denoise an
image and that resulted in really good
quality images over time. Stable
diffusion was a company other companies
built their own diffusion models and
then people are now like okay can we try
this also for text? Doesn't you know
make intuitive sense yet because it
feels like okay
it's not something continuous like a
pixel that we can differentiate. It's
like a discrete text so how do we
implement that denoising process? But
it's kind of like similar to the BERT
models by Google like when you go back
to the original transformer there were
like the encoder and the decoder. The
decoder is what we are using right now
in in GPT and so forth. The encoder
it's more like
a parallel let's say technique where you
have multiple tokens that you fill in in
parallel instead of so GPT models they
do auto regressive one token at a time.
You you complete the sentence one token
at a time and in BERT models you have a
text that's a sentence that has gaps.
You like mask them out and then one
iteration is filling in these gaps. And
text diffusion is kind of like that
where you are
starting with let's say some random text
and then you are filling in the missing
parts or you are refining them
iteratively and you have multiple
iterations. And the cool thing here is
that this can do multiple tokens at the
same time so it's kind of like
the promise of having it more efficient.
Now the the trade off is of course well
how good is the quality? It might be
faster
and then now you have this dimension of
the denoising process. The more steps
you do, the better the text becomes.
Um, and people, you know, I mean, you
you can scale in different ways. They
try to see if that is maybe
a valid alternative to the
auto-regressive model in terms of giving
you
the same quality for less compute. Uh,
right now I think it's, you know, there
are papers that suggest, okay, if you
want to get the same quality, you uh,
have to crank up the denoising steps,
and then you end up spending the same
compute you would spend on an
auto-regressive model.
Um, the other downside is, well, it's
parallel, which sounds appealing, but
some tasks are not parallel. Like, you
know, like reasoning tasks, tool use,
maybe, where you have to ask an in code
interpreter to give you an intermediate
result, and that is kind of tricky with
diffusion models. So, there are some
hybrids, but the main idea is, can we
parallelize it? And so, interesting
avenue. I think right now, there are
mostly research,
let's say, models out there, like Llama
and some other ones. I saw some I saw
some startups deployed models. There is
no big diffusion model at scale, you
like, you know, like Gemini, ChatGPT
scale, at that level. But, there was an
announcement by Google, like a a site
where they said they are launching
Gemini diffusion, and they put it into
context of their, I think, Nano-2 model.
And then they said, basically, for the
same
quality on most benchmarks, we can
generate things much faster. So, you
mentioned what's next. I don't think the
text diffusion model is going to replace
auto-regressive LLMs, but it will be
something maybe for quick, uh,
cheap, at scale tasks. Maybe the free
tier in future will be something like
that.
>> I think there's a couple examples where
it's I I've heard that it's actually
been started to be used. I think, to
paint an example of why this is so much
better, for example, when GPT-5 is
taking 30 minutes to respond, it's
generating one token at a time. And this
diffusion idea is essentially generate
all of those completion all of those
tokens in the completion in one batch,
which is why it could be way faster. And
I think it could be suited the startups
I'm hearing are like codes startups
where you have a code base
and you have somebody that's effectively
vibe coding and they say make this
change. And a code diff is essentially a
huge reply from the model, but it
doesn't have to have that much external
context and you can get it really fast
by using these diffusion models. So
that's what I've heard of one example is
that they use these text diffusion to
generate really long diffs because doing
it with a auto regressive model would
take minutes and that time for like a
user facing product causes a lot of
churn. So like every second you lose a
lot of users. So I I think that's going
to be this thing where it's going to
grow and have some applications, but I
actually thought that different types of
models were going to be used for
different things more sooner sooner than
they have been. So I kind of trade-off.
I think that the tool use point is the
one that's stopping them from being
um like most general purpose cuz like
cloud code and this chat GPT with search
like
the very the auto regressive chain is
interrupted with some external tool and
I don't know how to do that with a
diffusion setup.
>> So what's the future of tool use this
year and in the coming years? Do you
think there's going to be a lot of
developments there how that's integrated
to the entire stack?
>> I do think right now, I mean it's mostly
on the proprietary LLM side but I think
we will see more of that in the open
source tooling and I think I mean it is
a huge unlock because then you can
really outsource certain tasks from just
memorization to actual
you know, like instead of
having the LLM memorize what is 23 plus
five, just use a calculator.
>> So you think that can help solve
hallucination?
>> Uh not solve it but reduce it. Um so
still the LLM needs to know what um
like when to ask for a tool call and the
second one is well,
it doesn't mean the internet is always
correct. You can do a web search but
let's say
uh asked who won the World Cup in let's
say 1998, it still needs to find the
right website and get the right
information. So, you you can still go to
the incorrect website and give me
incorrect information. So, I don't think
it will fully solve that, but it is
improving it in that sense. And um
So, another cool paper earlier this
year, uh I think it was
December 31st, so it's not technically
2026, but close. So, like the recursive
uh language model. That that's a cool
idea to kind of take this even a bit
further. So, just to explain uh so,
Nathan, you also mentioned earlier
it's harder to do cool research in
academia because of the compute budget.
If I recall correctly, they did
everything with GPT-5. So, they didn't
even use local models, but the idea is
let's say if a long context task,
instead of having the LLM solve all of
it in like one shot or even like in a
chain, you break it down into subtasks.
So, you have the LLM decide when like
what is a good let's say subtask, and
then recursively call an LLM to solve
that. And I think something like that
also then adding tools and you know,
each one maybe you have like a huge Q&A
task, so each one goes to the web and
gathers information, and then you pull
it at the end together and stitch it
back together. Um like where uh I think
there's going to be a lot of unlock
using things like that where
you you not necessarily improve the LLM
itself, you improve how the LLM is used
and what the LLM can use.
One downside right now with tool use is
you have to give the LLM permission to
use tools. And
that will take some trust, especially if
you want to unlock uh things like
having an LLM answer emails for you.
Well, not even answer, but just sort
them for you or select them for you or
something like that. I don't know if I
would today give an LLM access to my
emails, right? I mean, this is like a
huge risk.
>> I think I think that's a cool One last
point on the tool use thing. I think
that
you hinted at this, and we've both come
at this in our own ways, is that the
open versus closed models use tools in
very different ways where open models
people go to hugging face and you
download the model and then the person's
going to be like, oh, what tool do I
want? And I don't know, XA is my search
preferred search provider, but somebody
else might care for a different search
startup where you release a model it
needs to be useful for multiple tools
for multiple use cases, which is really
hard cuz you're making like a general
reasoning engine model, which is
actually what GPT- OS is good for. But
on the closed models, you're deeply
integrating a specific tool into your
experience. And I think that open models
will struggle to replicate some of the
things that I like to do with closed
models, which will be like, I don't
know, you can reference a mix of public
and private information and something
that I keep trying every 3 to 6 months I
try like Codex on the web, which is just
prompting a model to make an update to
some GitHub repository that I have. And
it's just like like that set of secure
cloud environment is just so nice for
just like
send it off and do this thing and then
come back to me. And these will probably
help define some of the local open and
closed
niches, but I think initially cuz there
was such a rush to get this tool use
working that the open models were on the
back foot, which is kind of inevitable.
I think there's so much research that
there's so many resources in these
frontier labs, but will be fun when the
open models solve this because it's
going to necessitate like a bit more
flexible and potentially interesting
model that might work with this
recursive idea to like be an
orchestrator and the tool used model.
So, hopefully necessity drives some
interesting innovation there.
>> So, continual learning.
Uh, this is a long-standing
topic, important problem. I think that
increases in importance as the cost of
training of the models goes up. So, can
you explain what continual learning is
and how important it might be this year
and in the coming years to make
progress?
>> This relates a lot to this kind of SF
got the to what is AGI, what is which is
artificial general intelligence, and
what is ASI, artificial super
intelligence, and what are the language
models that we have today capable of
doing? I think the language models can
solve a lot of tasks, but a key
milestone among the AI community is
essentially when AI could replace any
remote worker taking in information and
solving digital tasks and doing them.
And I they limitation that's highlighted
by people is that
a language model will not learn from
feedback the same way that an employee
is. So, if you hire an editor, the
editor will mess up, but you will tell
them, and if you hired a good editor,
they don't do it again. But, language
models don't have this
ability to modify themselves and learn
very quickly. So, the idea is if we were
going to actually get to something that
is a true like general adaptable
intelligence that can go into any remote
work scenario, it needs to be able to
learn quickly from feedback and
on-the-job learning.
I'm personally more bullish on language
models by being able to just provide
them with very good contact. You said
like you maybe offline said that
like you can write extensive documents
to models where you say, I have all this
information. Here's all the blog posts
I've ever written. I like this type of
writing. My voice is based on this, but
a lot of people don't provide this
to models, and the models weren't
designed to like take this amount of
context previously. Like the agentic
models are just starting. So, it's this
kind of trade-off of do we need to
update the weights of this model with
this continual learning thing to make
them learn fast or the counter argument
is we just need to provide them with
more context and information, and they
will have the appearance of learning
fast by just having a lot of context and
being very smart.
>> So, we should mention the terminology
here. So, continual learning refers to
changing the weights continuously
so that the model adapts, adjusts based
on the new incoming information, does so
continually, rapidly, and frequently,
and so on.
Uh and then the thing you mentioned on
the other side of it is generally will
be referred to as in context learning.
As you learn stuff, there's a huge
context window. You can just keep
loading it with extra information every
time you prompt the system, which I
think both
are legitimately can be seen as
learning.
It's just a different place where you're
doing the learning.
>> I think to be honest with you, continual
learning that con- the updating of
weights we already have that in
different flavors. I mean, if you think
about how uh so I think the the
distinction here is do you do that on a
personalized custom model for each
person, or do you do it on a global
model scale? And I think we have that
already with
uh going from GPT-5 to 5.1 and 5.2. It's
maybe not immediate, but it is like a
curated update, a quick curated update
where uh there was feedback by the you
know things it couldn't do, feedback by
the community, they updated the weights,
next model, and so forth. So, it is I
mean, kind of like a flavor of that. Um,
uh other even finer grain example a
finer grained example is like RLVR. You
run it, it updates. The problem is you
can't just do that for each person
because it would be too expensive to
update the weights for each person. And
and I think that's the problem. So,
unless you get I I mean, even at OpenAI
scale, building the data centers, it
would be too expensive, I think. That is
only feasible once you have something on
the device where is on the consumer,
like what Apple tried to do with the
Apple foundation models, putting them on
the phone, and then they learn from the
experience.
>> Uh a bit of a related topic, but uh this
kind of
uh maybe anthropomorphized term, but
memory.
>> Mhm.
>> What are the different ideas of the
mechanism of how to add memory to these
systems? As you're increasingly seeing
so so personalized memory, especially.
>> So, right now it's mostly like uh
context, basically stuffing
things into the context and then just
recalling that. But, again, I I think
well,
it's expensive because you have to
like I mean, you can cache it, but still
you spend tokens on that. And the second
one is you can only do so much. I think
it's more like a preference and or a
style. I mean, a lot of people do that
when they solve math problems. You say
it's basically you can add previous
knowledge and stuff, but you also give
it certain preference prompts do what I
preferred last time, whatever, like
something like that. But, it does it
doesn't unlock uh new capabilities. So,
for that
uh
one thing people do use still is Laura
uh Laura adapters. These are basically
instead of updating the whole weight
matrix, they're two smaller weight
matrices um that you kind of have in
parallel overlays like the delta. But,
um yeah, you you can do that to some
extent, but then again,
it is economics.
So, there were also papers, for example,
Laura learns less, but forgets less.
It's like, you know, there's no free
lunch. If you want to learn more, you
need to use more weights, but it gets
more expensive. And then again, if you
learn more, you forget more. And it's
like you have to find that Goldilocks
zone, basically.
>> We haven't really mentioned it much, but
uh implied in this discussion is context
length, also. Is there a lot of
innovations that's possible there?
>> I think the
colloquially accepted thing is that it's
a computing data problem
where you can
and sometimes like small architecture
things which are like attention
variants. So, if you have we talked
about like
hybrid attention models, which is
essentially if you have what looks like
a state space model within your
transformer. And like those are better
suited because you have to spend less
compute to model the
furthest along token. And I think that
but those aren't free cuz they have to
be accompanied by a lot of compute or um
the right data. So, how many sequences
of 100,000 tokens do you have in the
world? And where do you get these? And I
think it just ends up being pretty
expensive to scale them. So, we've like
gotten to pretty quickly to like a
million tokens of input context length.
And I would expect it to keep increasing
and like get to like 2 million or 5
million this year, but I don't expect it
to go to like 100 million. And that
would be like a true breakthrough. And I
think those breakthroughs are possible.
Like the continual learning thing I
think of as a research problem where you
could There could be a breakthrough that
just makes transformers work way better
at this, and it's cheap.
>> Like these things could happen with so
much scientific attention, but
>> turning the crank, it'll be consistent
increases over time.
>> I think also looking at the extremes, I
think there's again no free lunch. So,
on the one extreme to make it cheap, you
have a let's say an RNN that has a
single state a state where you save
everything from the previous stuff. It's
like a specific
fixed-size thing, so you never really
grow the memory because it's you are
stuffing everything into one state. But
then,
the longer the context gets, the more
information you forget because you can't
you can't keep I mean, compress
everything into one state. Then, on the
other hand, you have the transformers
which try to remember every token, which
is great sometimes which if you want to
look up specific information, but it's
very expensive because you have the KV
cache that grows, the dot product that
grows. But then, yeah, like you said,
the Mamba layers, I mean, they kind of
have the same problem I would say like
an RNN you try to compress everything
into one state. You're a little more
selective there. But then, I think it's
like this Goldilocks zone again with
RetNet 3, they found like a good ratio
of how many attention layers do you need
for the global information where
everything is accessible compared to
having these compressed states. And I
think that's how
I think we will scale more by finding
better, let's say, ratios in Goldilocks
zone like between um
like computing
making it cheap enough to run, but then
also making it powerful enough to be
useful. And one more plug here, Um,
recursive language model paper, that is
one of the papers that tries to kind of
address the long context thing. So, what
they found is essentially instead of
stuffing everything into this long
context, um, if you break it up into
these smaller, um, multiple smaller
tasks, so you save memory by having
multiple smaller cards, you can get
actually better accuracy than having the
LM try everything all at once. I mean,
it's a new paradigm. We'll see, you
know, there might be other flavors of
that. So, I think with that we will
still make improvement on long context,
but then also, like Nathan said, I think
the problem is for pre-training itself,
we don't have as many long context
documents as other
documents, so it's harder to study,
basically, um, how LMs behave and stuff
like that on on that level, like
>> There are some rules of thumb where
essentially you pre-train a language
model, like although we pre-trained it
like 8K context length and then extended
to 32K with training. And there's some
rules of thumb where you just like
essentially doubling the training
context length takes like 2X compute,
and then you can normally like 2 to 4X
the context length again. So, I think a
lot of it ends up being kind of compute
bound at pre-training, which is in this
like we talked about this, everyone
talks about this, a big increase in
compute for the top labs this year, and
that should reflect in some longer
context windows, but I think on the
post-training side, there's some more
interesting things, which is as we have
agents
the agents are going to manage this
context on their own, where now at
people that use Claude code a lot dread
the compaction, which is when Claude
takes its entire full 100,000 tokens of
compacting into bulleted list, but what
the next models will do, I'm just about
novel, I'm sure people are already
working on this, is essentially the
model can control when it compacts and
how. So, you can essentially like train
your RL algorithm where compaction is an
action where it shortens the history,
and then the problem formulation will be
I want to keep the maximum evaluation
scores that I have gotten while the
model compacts its history to the
minimum length, because then you have
the minimum amount of tokens that you
need to do this kind of compounding auto
aggressive prediction. So, there's
actually pretty nice problem setups in
this where the like these agentic models
learn to use their context in a
different way than just plow forward.
>> One interesting also recent example
would be Deep Seek version 3.2 where
they had like the sparse attention
mechanism where they have essentially
like a very efficient small lightweight
indexer and instead of attending to all
the tokens it selects, okay, what tokens
do I actually need? It's I mean it's
almost comes back to the original idea
of attention where you are selective,
but attention is always on you have
maybe zero weight on some of them, but
you use them all, but they are even more
like, okay, let's just mask that out or
like not even
do that. And even with um
sliding window attention almost that is
also kind of like that idea you have
that rolling window where you keep it
fixed cuz you don't need everything all
the time. You occasionally some layers
you might, but it's wasteful, but right
now I think yeah,
if you use everything you're on the safe
side. It gives you the best bang for the
buck because you never miss information
and right now I think this year will be
more also the year figuring out, like
you said, how to be more smart about
that. I think right now people want to
have the next state of the art and the
state of the art is happens to be the
brute force expensive thing and then
once you have that, like you said, keep
that accuracy, but let's see how we can
do that cheaper now, like tricks, you
know.
>> Yeah, all this scaling thing. Like the
reason we get the Claude 4.5 Sonnet
model first is because you can train it
faster and you're not hitting these
compute walls as soon and they can just
try a lot more things and get the model
faster even though the bigger model is
actually better.
>> I think we should say that there's a lot
of exciting stuff going on in the AI
space. Um
my mind has recently been really focused
on robotics. So, we have today really
almost entirely didn't talk about
robotics.
Uh there's a lot of stuff on image gen,
video generation.
Uh
I think it's fair to say that the most
exciting research work in terms of the
amount, intensity,
uh fervor is in the LLM space, which is
why I think it's justified for us to
really focus on the LLM that we're
discussing. But, it would be nice to
bring in some certain things that might
be useful. For example, world models.
There's growing excitement on that. Do
you think there would be any
use in this coming year for world models
in the LLM space?
>> Uh yes, I I do think as well. Also, with
LLMs, I what's the interesting thing
here is I think if we unlock more LLM
capabilities, it also automatically
unlocks all the other fields because uh
or not unlocks, but like makes progress
faster. It's because, you know, a lot of
researchers and engineers use LLMs, like
we said, for coding. So, even if they
work on robotics, if you like optimize
these LLMs that help you with coding,
you know, it's like it pays off. Uh
But, then uh yes, world models are
interesting. It's basically where you
have the model run a simulation of the
world in a sense, like a little toy
thing of the real thing, which can again
unlock capabilities um
like that are the LLM is not aware of.
It can simulate things.
And uh I think See, this is like
something I think LLMs, they just happen
to work
well by pre-training and then doing the
next token prediction. But,
we could do this even a bit, you know,
like
sophisticated in a sense. So, uh what
I'm saying is like with uh there's like
uh I think it was by Meta, a paper uh
Coda world models. Um so, where they
basically apply the concept of world
models to LLMs again, where they So,
instead of just having next token
prediction and verifiable rewards,
checking the answer correctness, they
also make sure the intermediate
variables are correct, you know, like
it's kind of like a
the model is learning basically a code
environment in a sense. And I think this
makes a lot of sense. It's just like
expensive to do, but
uh
this is like making things more
sophisticated, like modeling
like
modeling the whole thing, not just the
result. And so
it can add more
value. I remember when I was a grad
student, there is a um
so there's a competition called CASP, I
think, where they do
protein structure prediction. Like they
predict the structure of a protein that
is not solved yet at that point. So in a
sense, this is actually great and and I
think we need something like that for
LLMs also, where
you do the benchmark, but no one does So
you hand in the results, but no one
knows the solution, and then after the
fact someone reveals that. But
uh AlphaFold, when it came out, it
crushed uh
you know, this benchmark. I mean
there are also multiple very iterations,
but I remember the first one um I'm not
an expert in that subfield, but the
first one explicitly modeled the
physical um
interactions of the
you know, the physics of the molecule,
also like the angles and possible
angles. And then in the next version, I
think they got rid of this. So and just
with brute force scaling it up, and I
think with LLMs, we are currently in
this brute force scaling, because it
just happens to work. But I do think
also at some point it might make sense
to bring back this
thing. And I think with cold with world
models, I think that is where I think
that might be actually quite cool. Um
I mean, yeah. And then of course also
for robotics, that is completely
unrelated from LLMs.
>> Yeah, yeah. In robotics is very
explicit. So there's the problem of
locomotion and manipulation. Locomotion
is much more solved, especially in
learning domain.
But there's a lot of value, just like
with the initial protein folding
systems, bringing in the traditional
model-based methods. So you don't It's
it's unlikely
that you can just learn the manipulation
or the whole body local manipulation
problem end to end.
>> That's the dream. But then you realize
when you look at the magic of the human
hand and the complexity of the real
world, you realize it's really hard to
learn this all the way through, the way
I guess AlphaFold 2 did.
>> I'm excited about the robotic learning
space, so I think it's collectively
getting like supercharged by all the
excitement and investment in language
models generally, where they're getting
like the infrastructure for training
transformers, which is like a general
modeling thing, is becoming like like
world-class industrial tooling, where
any wherever that was a limitation for
robotics, it's just like way better.
There's way more compute. And then on
top of like they take these language
models and use them as kind of central
units where you can do interesting
explorative work around something that
kind of already works.
And then I see it emerging as like
kind of like we talked about Hugging
Face Transformers and Hugging Face. I
think when I was at Hugging Face, I was
trying to get this to happen, but it was
too early. It's like
these open robotic models on Hugging
Face and be having be able to contribute
data and fine-tune them. I think we're
much closer now that the investment in
robotics and I think self-driving cars
is related and enables this, where it's
like once you get to the point where you
can have this sort of ecosystem where
somebody can download a robotics model
and maybe fine-tune it to their robot or
share data sets across the world. And
there's some data There's some
work in this area, like RTX, I think it
was a few years ago, where people are
trying to do that. But I think once they
have this ecosystem, it'll look very
different. And then this whole
post-ChatGPT
boom is putting more resources into
that, which I think is a very good area
for doing research.
>> This is also resulting in much better,
more accurate, more realistic simulators
being built, closing the sim-to-real gap
in the robotic space.
But, you know, you mentioned a lot of
excitement in the robotic space and a
lot of investment. The downside of that,
which happens in hype cycles, I
personally believe most robotics people
believe that it's not robotics is not
going to be solved at at the time scale
as being kind of implicitly or
explicitly promised.
And so what happens when there's all
these robotics companies that spring up
and then they don't have a product that
works then there's going to be this kind
of crash of excitement which is
nerve-racking. There's the hopefully
something else will come in and keep
swooping in so that the the the
continued development of some of these
ideas keeps going.
>> related to the continual learning issue
essentially where the real world is so
complex where with LLMs, yeah, you don't
need to really have something learn for
the user because there are a lot of
things everyone has to do. Everyone
maybe wants to I don't know fix their
grammar in their email or
code on something like that. It's it's
more constrained so you can kind of
prepare the model for that. But
preparing the robot for the real world
that's harder. I mean you have the
foundation models, the robotic
foundation models, but you can learn
certain things like grasping things, but
then again, I think every everyone's
house is different, you know, like it's
so different and that is I think where
the robot would have to learn on the job
essentially and I think that I guess is
the the bottleneck right now like how to
you know, customizing it on the fly
essentially.
>> I do I don't think I can possibly
understate the importance of the thing
that doesn't get talked about almost at
all by robotics folks or anyone is
safety.
All the interesting complexities we talk
about learning, all the failure modes
and failure cases, everything we've been
talking about LLMs, sometimes it fails
in these interesting ways.
All of that is fun and games in the LLM
space. In the robotic space, in people's
homes
across millions of minutes, a
billions of interactions, you're really
are almost allowed to fail,
never.
When you have embodied systems that are
put out there in the real world, you you
just have to solve so many
problems you never thought you'd have to
solve when you're just thinking about
the general robot learning problem.
>> I'm so
bearish on in-home learned robots for
consumer purchase. I'm very bullish on
self-driving cars, and I'm very bullish
for robotic automation, e.g., like
Amazon distribution, where Amazon has
built whole new distribution centers
designed for robots first rather than
humans.
>> There's a lot of excitement in AI
circles about AI enabling a lot of
automation in like mass-scale
manufacturing, and I do think that the
path
to robots doing that is more reasonable,
where it's like a thing that is designed
and optimized to do a repetitive task
that a human could conceivably do, but
doesn't want to. And then I'm much so
But it's also going to take a lot longer
than people probably predict. I think
that the the leap from
AI singularity to we can now scale up
mass manufacturing in the US because we
have a massive AI advantage is one that
is
troubled by a lot of political and
and other challenging problems.
>> Let's talk about timelines.
Uh specifically timelines to AGI or ASI,
is it fair, like as a starting point, to
say that nobody really agrees on the
definitions of AGI and ASI?
>> I kind of think there's a lot of
disagreement, but among
I've been getting pushed back where a
lot of people kind of say the same
thing, which is like a a thing that
could reproduce most digital economic
work. So, like the remote remote worker
is a fairly reasonable example, and I
think OpenAI's definition is somewhat um
related to that, which is like an AI
that can do a lot of economic like a
certain number of economically valuable
tasks, which I don't really love as a
definition, but I think it could be a a
grounding point because
um language models today, while
immensely powerful, are are not this
remote worker drop-in, and there are
things that you can think of that are
could be done by an AI that are way
harder than remote work, which are like
solving a finding an unexpected
scientific discovery that you couldn't
even pause it, which would be an example
of something that somebody says is like
an artificial super intelligence
problem. Or like sol- taking in all
medical records and finding linkages
across certain illnesses that people
didn't know, or figuring out that some
common drug can treat some niche cancer.
Like they would say that that is like a
super intelligence thing. So, these are
kind of natural tiers.
My problem with it is that it
becomes deeply entwined with like the
quest for meaning of AI and this
religious aspects to it.
So, there's kind of different there's
different paths you can take it. And I
don't even know if the remote
>> work is a good definition cuz what
exactly is that? It's like perfect tool
use. I actually I mean I like I don't
know if you like the originally titled
AI 27 report. They focus more on code
and research taste. So, the the target
there is the superhuman coder. So, they
have several several milestone systems.
Superhuman coder, superhuman AI
researcher, then superintelligent AI
researcher, and
then the full ASI, artificial
superintelligence. But the
after you develop the superhuman coder,
everything else follows quickly.
There, the task is to
have a fully autonomous like
automate coding.
So, any kind of coding you need to do in
order to perform research
is fully automated. And from there,
humans would be doing AI research
together with that system, and they
would quickly be able to develop
a system that's actually can do the
research for you. That's the idea.
And then initially their prediction was
2027 28 and now they've pushed it back
by 3 to 4 years to
to 2031 mean prediction. Probably my
prediction is it would be on 2031
but at least you can get concrete way
think about how difficult it is to
fully automate programming.
>> Yeah, I do agree with some of their
presumptions and dynamics on how it
would play out
but I think they did a good they did
good work in the scenario defining
milestones that are concrete and to tell
a useful story which is why the reach
for this AI 2027 document well transcend
and Silicon Valley is because they told
a good story and they did a lot of
rigorous work to do this. I think that
camp that I fall into is that like AI is
like so-called jagged which will be
excellent at some things and really bad
at some things. So I think that
when they're close to this
automated software engineer what it will
be good at is that traditional ML
systems in front end the model is
excellent at but the distributed ML the
models are actually really quite bad at
because there's so little training data
on doing large scale distributed
learning and things and this is
something that we already see and I
think this is just getting amplified and
then it's kind of messier in these
trade-offs and then there's like how do
you think AI research works and so on.
>> So you think basically super human coder
is
almost unachievable meaning like because
of the jagged nature of the thing you're
just always going to have gaps in
capabilities.
>> I think it's assigning completeness to
something where the models are kind of
super human at some types of code and I
think that will continue and people are
creative so they'll utilize this like
incredible abilities and like to fill in
the weaknesses of the models and move
really fast and it'll always kind of be
this I foresee for a long time this
dance between the humans are enabling
this thing that the model can't do and
the best the best AI researchers are the
ones that can enable this superpower.
And I think this aligns to like to what
we already see. I think like cloud code
for building a website, you can stand up
a beautiful website in a few hours or do
data analysis. And I don't think it's
it's going to keep getting better at
these things and it'll pick up some new
code skills and stuff
that it'll get along the way and kind of
linking to what's happening in in big
tech is like this AI 2027 report is like
it leans into the singularity idea where
I think research is messy and social and
largely in the data in ways that AI
models can't process. But like what we
do have today is really powerful and
these
tech companies are all collectively
buying into this with tens of billions
of dollars of investment. So like we are
going to get some much better version of
chat GPT, a much better version of cloud
code than we already have. I think that
it's just like hard to predict where
that is going, but the like
bright clarity of that future is why
some of the most powerful people in the
world are putting so much money into
this. And I think it's just kind of
small differences between like we don't
actually know what a better version of
chat GPT is, but also like
can it automate AI research? I would say
probably not at least in this time
frame. Like big tech is going to spend a
hundred billion dollars much faster than
we get a automated AI researcher that
enables a AI research singularity.
>> So you think your prediction would be
what? Like
if this is even a useful milestone,
we're more than 10 years out.
>> I would say less than that on the
software side, but I think longer than
that on the things like research.
>> Let's just like
for fun try to imagine a world where all
software writing is fully automated.
Like can you imagine that world?
>> By the end of this year, the amount of
software that'll be automated will be so
high. But it's like it'll be the things
of like you're trying to train a model
with RL and you need to have multiple
bunches of GPUs communicating with each
other. That'll still be hard, but I
think it'll be much easier.
>> One of the ways to think about this is
the full automation of programming.
It's just
think of like lines of useful code
written, the fraction of that to the
number of humans in the loop. So,
presumably, there'll be for a long time
humans in the loop of software writing.
It'll just be fewer and fewer relative
to the amount of code written, right?
And the the the SC superhuman coder, I
think the the the presumption there is
it goes to zero, the number of humans in
the loop. What does that world look like
when the number of humans in the loop is
in the hundreds?
Not in the hundreds of thousands.
>> I think software engineering will be
driven more to system design and goals
of outcomes. Where I do think software
is largely going to be Come on. I think
this has been happening over the last
few weeks where people have gone from a
month ago of like, "Oh, yeah, agents are
kind of slop." Which is a famous Carpedi
quote to like
the
what is a little bit of a meme of like
the industrialization of software when
anyone can just create software at their
fingerprints. Like I do think we are
closer to that side of things, and it
takes direction
and like understanding how the systems
work to extract that best from the
language models. And I think it's hard
to like accept the gravity of
how much is going to change with
software development and how many more
people can do things without ever
looking at it.
>> what's interesting is to think about
whether these systems will be
independent, like completely independent
in the sense that Well, I have no doubt
that LLMs will kind of at some point
solve coding in a sense like calculators
solve calculating, right? So, at some
point humans develop the tool that, you
know, you never need a human to
calculate that number. You just type it
in and
it's an algorithm. You You can do it in
a in that sense. And I I think that's
the same probably for
coding. But the question is So, so I
think what will happen is Yeah, you will
just say build that website. It will
make a really good website and then you
maybe refine it, but will it do things
independently where
so
will you be still having humans asking
the AI to do something like
will there be a person say build that
website or will there be AI that just
builds websites or something or
whatever?
>> I think using talking about building
websites is the
>> Too simple.
>> It's just like the there's the the the
problem with websites and the problem
with web you know, HTML and all that
kind of stuff. It's very resilient to
just
slop. It will show you slop. It's good
at showing slop.
I would rather like think of like safety
critical systems like
uh asking AI to end-to-end generate
something that manages logistics
or manages cars and fleet of cars all
that kind of stuff. So, end-to-end
generate stuff for you.
>> I think a more intermediate example is
take something like Slack or Microsoft
Word. I think
if the organizations allow it, AI could
very easily
implement features end-to-end and do a
fairly good job for like things that you
want to try. You want to add a new
like tab in Slack that you want to use
and I think AI will be able to do that
pretty well.
>> Actually, that's a really great example.
How far away are we from that?
>> Like
this year.
>> See, I don't I don't know. I don't know.
>> I guess I don't know how bad production
code bases are, but I think that
within like on the order of low years, a
lot of people are going to be pushed to
be more of like a designer and product
manager where you have multiple of these
agents that can try things for you and
they might take one to two days to
implement a feature or attempt to fix a
bug and you have these dashboards, which
I think Slack is actually a good
dashboard where your agents will talk to
you and you'll then give feedback, but
things like
like I make a website is like you want
to make a logo that's passable. Like I
think these like cohesive design things
and this style is going to be very hard
for models and deciding on what to add
at the next time.
>> I just okay, so I hang out with a lot of
programmers and some of them are
a little bit on the skeptical side in
general. That's just vibe-wise they're
like that.
I just think there's a lot of complexity
involved in adding features to complex
systems. Like if you look at the
browser, Chrome.
If I wanted to add a feature, if I
wanted to have tabs as a as opposed to
up top, I want them on the left side.
Interface, right?
I think we're not this is not a next
year thing.
>> One of the Claude releases this year,
one of their tests was we give it a
piece of software and leave Claude to
run to recreate it entirely. And it
could already almost rebuild scra like
Slack from scratch just given the
parameters of the software and left in a
sandbox environment
>> part I like almost better.
>> So it might be that the smaller newer
companies are advantaged and they're
like, we don't have to have the bloat
and complexity and therefore this future
exists.
>> And I think this gets to the point that
you mentioned that some people are
you talk to are skeptical and I think
that's not because the LM can't do XYZ,
it's because people don't want it to do
it this way.
>> Some of that could be a skill issue on
the human side.
Unfortunately, we have to be honest with
ourselves. And some of that could be an
underspecification issue. So
programming
like you're like you're just assuming
this is like in in relationships and
friendships communication type issue.
You're assuming the LM somehow supposed
to read your mind. I think this is where
spec-driven design is really important.
Like you just
using natural language specify like what
you want.
>> that's like if you talk to people at the
labs, they use these in their training
and production code. Like Claude code is
built with Claude code. And they all use
these things extensively and Dario talks
about how much of Claude's code own and
it's like
these people are slightly ahead in terms
of the capabilities they have and they
probably spend on inference.
They could spend 10 to 100 plus X as
much as we're spending. Like we're on a
lowly 100 or $200 a month plan. Like
they truly let it rip. And I think that
that
like with the pace of progress that we
have, I it seems like
like where a year ago we didn't have
Claude code and we didn't really have
reasoning models and it's like the
difference between sitting here today
and what we can do with these models and
it seems like there's a lot of low like
there's a lot of low hanging fruit to
improve them. The failure modes are
pretty dumb. It's like Claude, you tried
to use the CLI command I don't have
installed 14 times and then I then I
sent you the command to run. It's like
that thing from a modeling perspective
is pretty fixable.
So I I don't
>> I agree with you. I've been
been
becoming more and more bullish in
general. Speaking to what you're
articulating,
I think it is a human skill issue.
So Anthropic is leading the way in the
or other companies in understanding how
to best use the models for programming
and therefore they're effectively using
them. I think there's a lot of
programmers on the outskirts. They're
like
they don't I mean there's not a really
good guide in how to use them. People
are trying to figure it out exactly.
>> It might be very expensive. Like it
might be that the entry point for that
is $2,000 a month which is only tech
companies and rich people.
Which is like like that could be it.
>> But it might be worth it. I mean if if
if the final result is is a working
software system, it may be worth it. But
by the way, it's funny how we converge
from the discussion of timeline to AGI
to something more pragmatic and and
useful. Is there anything concrete and
interesting and useful and profound to
be said about timeline to AGI and ASI?
Are these discussions a bit too
detached from the day-to-day. There's
interesting bets. So, there's a lot of
people trying to do reinforcement
learning with verifiable rewards, but in
real scientific domains where there's
startups that are spending like they
have hundreds of millions of dollars of
funding and they have wet labs where
they're having language models propose
hypotheses that are tested in the real
world. And I I would say that I think
they're very early or they're early, but
with the pace of progress, it's like
>> Yeah.
>> maybe they're early by
6 months and they make it because they
were there first or maybe they're early
by 8 years and you don't really know.
So, I think that that type of moonshot
to
um branch this momentum into other other
sciences is like, okay, like that would
be very transformative if like AlphaFold
moments happen in all sorts of other
scientific domains by like a startup
solving this. I think there are
startups, I think maybe Harmonic is one
where they're going all in on language
models plus lean for math. I think you
had another podcast guest who talked
about this recently and it's like
we don't know exactly what's going to
fall out of
spending a hundred million dollars on
that model. And most of them will fail,
but a couple of them might be big
breakthroughs that are very different
than ChatGPT or cloud code type software
experiences. Like a tool that's only
good for a
PhD mathematician, but makes them a
hundred X effective. Like
>> Okay, I agree. I think this will happen
in a lot of domains, especially also
like domains that have a lot of you
know, resources like finance and legal
and pharmaceutical companies. But then
again, is it really AGI again because we
are now specializing it again. And then
again, is it really that much different
from back in the day how we had
specialized algorithms. It's I think
it's just the same thing more
way more sophisticated, but
I don't know, is there a threshold when
we call it AGI I guess. I think the the
real cool thing is here that we have
like the foundation models that we can
specialize. I think that that's like the
the breakthrough at some point. Right
now, I think we are not there yet
because well, first it's too expensive,
but also
you know, like ChatGPT doesn't just give
away that ChatGPT to customize it. I
think once that's going to be true in a
some way and I think I can imagine this
as a business model that
ChatGPT OpenAI says at some point like,
"Hey, you know, Bank of America, for 100
million, we will do your custom model."
or something like that. And I think that
will be the huge economic value add. The
other thing though is
also companies, I mean, right now, what
is the differentiating factor? I mean,
if everyone uses the same LLM, if
everyone uses ChatGPT, they will all do
the same thing again. I mean, then
well, it's everyone is moving in
lockstep, but usually companies they
want to have a competitive advantage and
I think there's then no way around using
some of their private data and
experimenting and maybe specializing.
It's going to be interesting, yeah.
>> Sitting in the pace of progress, it does
just feel like things are coming. I
don't think the AGI and ASI thresholds
are particularly
useful.
>> I I think I guess the real question and
this takes us to the road worker thing
is when are we going to see
a a big obviously leap in a economic
impact?
Cuz currently there's not been an
obvious leap in economic impact of LLM
models, for example.
And that's, you know, aside from AGI or
ASI or all that kind of stuff, there's a
real question of like when are we going
to see a GDP like
>> Mhm. Mhm.
>> jump.
>> Yeah, it's like what is the GDP made up
of? Like a lot of it is like financial
services, so like
I don't I don't know what this is. It's
just hard for me to think about the
GDP bump, but like
I'd say that software development
becomes valuable in a different way when
you no longer have to look at the code
anymore. So, when
when it is like Claude will make you a
small business, which is essentially
Claude can set up your website, your
bank account, your email, and your
whatever else, and like you just have to
express like what you're trying to put
into the world, like that's not just a
enterprise market, but it is a hard like
I don't know how you get people to try
doing that. I guess if ChatGPT can do
it, like people are trying ChatGPT.
>> I think it boils down to
the the scientific question of how hard
is tool use to solve.
Cuz a lot of the stuff you're implying,
the remote work stuff is tool use. It's
like how computer use, like how you have
an LLM that goes out there
this agentic system and does something
in the world
and only screws up 1% of the time.
>> Computer use is a good example of what
labs care about and we haven't seen a
lot of progress on. We saw multiple
demos in
2025 of like
Claude can use your computer or OpenAI
had Kua and they all suck.
>> Yeah.
>> they're also investing money in this
and I think that will be a good example
where that's actually something where it
just seems
pretty like taking over the whole screen
seems a lot harder than having an API
that they can call in the back end and
some of that is you have to then set up
a different environment for the model to
work in. Like they're not working on
your MacBook, they are individually
interfacing with Google and Amazon and
Slack and they handle all of these
things in a very different way than
humans do. So, some of this might be
structural blockers.
>> Also, like specification-wise, I think
the problem is also for, you know,
arbitrary tasks, well, you still have to
specify what you want your LLM to do and
how do you do that in a
what is the environment? How do you
specify? You can say what the end goal
is, but
if it can't solve the end goal with
LLMs, if you ask it for text, you can
always, you know, clarify, do sub steps.
What is how how do you put that
information into a system that let's say
books a travel trip for you. You can
say, "Well, you screwed up my credit
card information." But
even to get it to that point, like how
do you like
as a user guide the model before like it
can even attempt that. I I think the
interface is really hard.
>> Yeah, it has to learn a lot about you
specifically.
>> Mhm.
>> And about this goes to the continue
continue learning about the general
mistakes that are made throughout and
then mistakes that are made through you.
>> All day I interfaces are getting set up
to ask humans for input. I think Cloud
Code we talk about a lot. It asks
feedback on questions if it doesn't have
enough specification on your plan or
your desired. It starts to ask
questions. Would you rather
Um we talked about memory which saves
across chats which
it's
first implementation is kind of odd. It
would be like it would mention my dog's
name or something like in a chat. I'm
like, "You don't need to be subtle about
this. Like I don't care." But the like
things that are emerging are Chat GPT
has the pulse feature which is like um
a curated couple paragraphs with links
to something to look at or to talk about
and people talk about how the language
models are going to ask you questions
which I think is
a very it's probably going to work. The
language model is like it knows you had
a doctor appointment or something. It's
like, "Hey, how are you feeling after
that?" which is like
um again goes into the territory of
humans are very susceptible to this and
there's a lot of social change to come.
But also like they're experimenting with
having the models engaged. Some people
really like this pulse feature which is
that processes your chats and
automatically searches for information
and puts it in the Chat GPT app. So
there's a lot of things coming.
>> I I used that feature before and I
always feel bad because it does that
every day and I rarely check it out.
It's like how much money like I mean
computers burned on something I don't
even look at, you know, where it's like
it's kind of like
>> a lot of idle compute in the world so
don't feel too bad.
>> Okay. Do you think uh new ideas might be
needed? Is it possible that the path to
AGI, whatever that is, however we define
that, to solve computer use more more
generally, to solve
biology and chemistry and physics,
sort of the Dario definition of AGI or
powerful AI. Do you think it's possible
that totally new ideas are needed?
Non-LLM, non-RL
ideas. What might they look like?
This is we're not going into philosophy
land, a little bit.
>> For something like a singularity to
happen, I would say yes.
And then new ideas could be
architectures or training algorithms,
which is like fundamental deep learning
things. But they're in that nature,
pretty hard to predict. And I but I
think we won't get very far even without
those advances. Like we might get the
software solution, but it might stop at
software and not do computer use without
more innovation. So I think that it's
like
a lot of progress would be coming, but
in if you're going to zoom out, like
there are still ideas in the next 30
years that are going to look like that
was a major
like scientific innovation that enabled
the next chapter of this, and I don't
know if it comes in 1 year or in 15
years.
>> Yeah, well I wonder if the bitter lesson
holds true for the next 100 years, what
that looks like.
>> If scaling laws are fundamental in deep
learning, I think the bitter lesson will
always apply, which is compute will
become more
abundant, but even within abundant
compute, the ones that
have a steeper scaling law slope or a
better offset, like this is the 2D plot
of performance and compute, and like
even if there's more compute available,
the ones that get 100x out of it will
win.
>> It might be something like literally
computer clusters orbiting Earth
with solar panels.
>> The problem with that is heat
dissipation. So you get all the
radiation from the sun and you don't
have any air to dissipate heat, but
there is a lot of space to put clusters.
There's a lot of solar energy there and
you could figure out the heat
dissipation, but there is a lot of
energy and there probably could be
engineering will to solve the heat
problem, so there could be.
>> Is it possible and we should say that it
definitely is possible. How likely is
is the question.
That we're basically
going to be plateauing this year. Not in
terms of the system capability, but what
the system capabilities actually mean
for human civilization. So, on the
coding front really nice websites will
be built.
Uh
very nice auto complete.
>> Mhm.
>> Very nice
uh way to understand code bases and
maybe help debug. But really just a a
very nice help on the coding front.
It can help research mathematicians do
some math.
It can help you with shopping. It can
help you with It can help It's a nice
helper. It's Clippy on steroids.
Uh what else? It may be a good education
tool and all that kind of stuff. But
computer use turns out extremely
difficult to solve.
So, I'm trying to be
I'm trying to frame the cynical case in
all these domains where it kind of
there's not a really huge economic
impact. We realize how costly it is to
train these systems at every level both
the pre-training and the inference. How
costly the inference is, the reasoning,
all of that.
Uh like is that possible and how likely
is that do you think?
>> When you look at the models, there's so
much obvious things to improve and it
take a long time to train these models
and to do this art and that it'll take
us with the ideas that we have multiple
years to actually saturate in terms of
whatever benchmark or performance we are
searching for.
It might serve very narrow niches Like
the average chat GPT and their million
user might not get a lot of benefit out
of this, but it is going to serve
different populations by getting better
at different things.
>> But I get I think what everybody's
chasing now is the is uh a general
system that's useful to everybody.
So okay, so if that's not that can
plateau, right?
>> I think that dream is actually kind of
dying. As you talked about with the
specialized models where it's like
and multi-modal is often like video
generation is a totally different thing.
>> That dream is kind of dying is a big
statement.
Cuz I don't know if it's dying. I don't
know if every I don't know if you ask
the actual financial lab people, they I
mean they're still chasing it, right?
>> I do think they are still like rushing
to get the next model out which will be
much better than the not just the
right of term, but will be better than
the previous one. And I I can't see them
slowing down. I just think the gains
will be made or felt more through not
only scaling the model, but now find So
I I feel like there's a lot of tech
debt. It's like, well, let's just put
the better model in there and
better model better model. And now
people are, okay, let's also at the same
time improve everything around it too.
Like, you know, like the engineering of
the context and inference scaling. And I
the big labs will still keep doing that.
And now also the smaller labs will catch
up to that because now
it's just like they are hiring more.
There will be more people. LLMs is kind
of like, you know, like a circle. They
also make them more productive and it
it's just it's like amplifying. I think
what we can expect is amplification, but
not like
a change of any like a paradigm change.
I don't think that is true, but
everything will be just amplified and
amplified and amplified. And I can see
that continuing for a long time, you
know.
>> Yeah, I guess my statement with the
dream is dying depends on exactly what
you think it's going to be doing. Like
Claude code is a general model that can
do a lot of things, but it's not like
necessarily like it
depends a lot on integrations and other
things. Like I bet Claude could do a
fairly good job of doing your email and
the hardest part is figuring out how to
give the information to it and how to
get it to be able to send your emails
and stuff like this. But that's just
kind of like
I think it goes back to like what is the
one model to rule everything ethos,
which is just like a thing in the cloud
that
handles your entire digital life and is
way smarter than
everybody. It's like it's operating in a
It's a It's a an interesting leap of
faith to go from Claude code becomes
that.
Which it like in some ways is
there's some avenues for that, but I do
think that like the
rhetoric of the industry is a little bit
different.
>> I think the immediate also thing we will
feel next as a normal person using LLMs
is will will probably be related to
something like also trivial like making
figures. Right now LLMs are terrible at
making figures. Is it because we are
getting served the cheap models with
very less like lesser inference computer
and behind the scenes? Maybe some
like there are some cranks we can
already get better figures, but if you
ask today, I don't know.
Draw a flow chart of XYZ. It's most of
the time terrible and it is kind of like
a very simple task for a human. I think
it's almost easier sometimes to draw
something than to write something.
>> Yeah, the multimodal understanding does
feel like something that
is odd that it's not better solved.
>> I think we're not saying one actually
obvious thing that we're not actually
realizing that's a gigantic thing that's
hard to measure, which is making all of
human knowledge accessible to the entire
world. Like we I
one of the things that I think
is hard to articulate, but there's just
a huge difference between Google search
and then LLM.
I feel like I can basically ask an LLM
anything and get an answer.
And
less it's doing less and less and less
hallucination.
And that means
understanding my own life,
figuring out a career trajectory,
figuring out how to solve the problems
all around me,
uh learn about anything through human
history.
That like
I I feel like nobody's really talking
about that
because they just immediately take it
for granted that it's just this is
awesome. That's why everybody's using it
is cuz you get answers for stuff.
And like the impact of that across time,
like think about this is not just in um
United States, it's all across the
world. Like kids
throughout the world being able to learn
these ideas, like the impact that has
across time is is probably that's where
the real like
talking about GDP. It won't be like a
leap. It'll be that's how we get to
Mars. That's how we build these things.
That's how we have a a million new open
AIs,
all the kind of innovation that happens
from there. And that's just this quiet
force that permeates everything, right?
Human knowledge.
>> I do agree with you and
in a sense
you make it makes knowledge more
accessible, but
it also I think depends on what the
topic is. For something like math
in a sense you can ask it questions, it
answers, but if you want to learn a
topic from scratch
I think it that again like we talked
about this earlier. I think the sweet
spot is I mean there are really good
math textbooks where someone laid it out
linearly and that is like let's say
proven strategy to learn this topic. And
it does make sense if you start from
zero to
ramp up to get like a like a information
dense text to soak it up, but then you
use the LLM to make infinite exercises.
Like you have problems in a certain area
and or have questions and something's
uncertain or like you're uncertain about
certain things, you ask it to generate
example problems. You solve them and you
have questions and then
maybe you need you need more background
knowledge and you ask it to to generate
that. And I think but
then the it won't give you anything
let's say that is not in the in the
textbook. It's just packaging it
differently if that makes sense. But
then there are things I feel like where
it also adds value in a more
I mean timely sense where there is no
good alternative besides a human doing
it on the fly. For example, if you I
don't know like let's say you're
planning to go to Disneyland and you try
to figure out which tickets to buy for
which park when. Well, there is no
textbook on that. There is no
information dense resource on that.
There's only the sparse internet. And
then there is a lot of value in the LLM.
You just ask it that has you have the
constraints I'm traveling these and
these days. I want to go there and
there. Please figure out what I need
when and from where and what what it
costs and stuff like that. And it it is
very customized on the fly
package and then this is like one of the
thousand examples and exercise
personalized personalization is
essentially like pulling information
from the sparse internet the
non-information dense thing where
there is no better version that exists.
It It just doesn't exist. You make it
from scratch almost.
>> And if it does exist, it's full of uh
speaking of Disney World like full of
what would you call it? Ad slop?
Like you just It's impossible to get uh
here, you go any city in the world.
What are the top 10 things to do? LLM is
just way better to ask than anything on
the internet.
>> now.
>> That's cuz they're massively subsidized
and they're going to be paid for by ads.
>> I look forward to that.
>> It's coming.
>> No.
No.
>> I hope there I mean I'm hoping there's a
very clear indication of what's an ad
and what's not an ad in that context.
>> I did a little you know that something I
mentioned a few years ago. It's like uh
I don't know, if you are looking for
a new running shoe, well, is this a
coincidence that Nike maybe comes up
first? Maybe, maybe not. And but I think
there are clear laws around this. You
have to be clear about that. But I think
that's what everyone fears. It's like
the subtle um you know, subtle
message in there or something like that.
But it also brings us to the topic of uh
I guess ads uh where I think this was
the thing Open AI tried to launch in
2025.
And uh just to because I think it's
still not uh making money in that other
way right now. So, that like having
really like ad spots in there. And then
the thing though is they couldn't
because, well,
there are alternatives without ads and
people would just flock to the other
products. And that also is is just like
crazy how
yeah, like they're one-upping each
other, spending so much money to just
get the users.
>> I think so. Like some Instagram ads, I
don't use Instagram, but I understand
the
appeal of paying a platform to find
users who will generally like your
product. And that is the best case of
things like Instagram ads. But there are
also plenty of cases where advertising
is very awful for incentives. And I
think that
a world where
the power of AI can integrate with that
positive view of like I am a person and
I have a small business and I want to
make
the best, I don't know, damn steak
knives in the world. And I want to sell
them to somebody who needs them. And if
like if AI can make that sort of
advertising thing work even better,
that's very good for the world,
especially with like
digital infrastructure because that's
how like the modern web has been built.
But that's not to say that like
addicting feeds so that you can show
people more content is a good thing. So,
it's like I think that's even what Open
AI would say is they want to find a way
that
can make the monetization upside of ads
while still giving their users agency.
>> Mhm. And I'm I personally would think
that Google is probably going to be
better at figuring out how to do this
cuz they have already have ad
supply
and they figure out how to turn this
demand in their Gemini app into useful
ads, then they can turn it on.
And
somebody will figure I don't know if I
think it's this year, but there will be
experiments with it.
>> I do think what holds companies back
right now is really just that the
competition is not doing it. It's more
like more like a reputation thing. It's
just I think people are just afraid
right now like ruining or like losing
their reputation losing users because it
is it would make headlines if someone
launched these ads.
>> Unless they were great. But the first
ads won't be great because it's a hard
problem that we don't know how to solve.
>> Yeah, I think also the first version of
that will likely be something like on X
like the timeline where you have like a
promoted post sometimes in between. It
will be something like that where it
will say like promoted or something like
small and then there will be an image or
something. I I think right now the
problem is who makes the first move.
>> If we go 10 years out, the proposition
for ads is that you will make so much
money on ads by having so many users
that you can use this to fund all better
R&D and make better models, which is why
like YouTube is dominating the
market for any like Netflix is scared of
YouTube. Like they have
the ad like they make I don't I pay $28
a month for premium. They make at least
$28 a month off of me and many other
people and they're just like creating
such a dominant position in video. So I
think that's the proposition, which is
that ads can make you have a sustained
advantage in what you are spending per
user. But
there's so much money in it right now
that it's like
like somebody starting that flywheel is
scary cuz it's a long-term bet.
>> Uh
you think there'll be some like crazy
big moves this year business-wise?
Like somebody like Google or Apple
acquiring Anthropic or something like
this.
>> Dario will never sell, but we are
starting to see some types of
consolidation with like Grok for $20
billion and
um Scale AI for almost $30 billion and
countless other deals like this that
they're structured in a way that is
actually
detrimental to the Silicon Valley
ecosystem, which is this sort of
licensing deal where not everybody gets
brought along rather than a full
acquisition that benefits the rank and
file of employees by getting their stock
vested. Like that's a big issue for
Silicon Valley culture to address
because the startup ecosystem is the
lifeblood where
if you get a if you join a startup
even if it's not that successful, your
startup very well might get acquired on
a cheap
premium of it and you'll get paid out
for this equity and these licensing
deals are essentially taking the top
talent a lot of the times.
I think Grok they deal for Grok to
Nvidia is rumored to be better to the
employees, but it is still this
antitrust avoiding
thing. But I think that this trend of
consolidation will continue. I've been
me and many smart people I respect have
been expecting call consolidation to
have happened sooner, but it seems like
some of these things are starting to
turn, which but at the same time you
have companies raising ridiculous
amounts of money for
reasons that you don't like I'm like I
don't know why you're taking that money.
So it's maybe like mixed this year, but
some consolidation pressure is starting.
>> What kind of surprising consolidation do
you think we'll see? So you're saying
you're saying Anthropic is is a never. I
mean Grok is a big one. Grok with a Q by
the way.
>> Yeah.
There's just a lot of startups and
there's a very high premium on AI
startups. So there's a lot of like there
could be a lot of
10 billion range acquisitions, which is
a really big acquisition for a startup
that was maybe founded
a year like a year ago. I think Mainas
AI from this company that's based in
Singapore that Meta founded was founded
eight months ago and then had a $2
billion exit.
And I think that there will be some
other big
like many billion-dollar acquisitions
like Perplexity.
>> Yeah, like people rumored them to Apple.
>> I think there's a lot of
pressure and liquidity in AI. There's
pressure on big companies to have
outcomes and I I would guess that a big
acquisition gives people leeway to then
tell the next chapter of that story.
>> I mean, yeah, there's a I guess Cursor.
We've been talking about Coden. Somebody
acquires Cursor.
>> They're in such a good position by
having so much user data.
>> Yeah.
>> And we talked about continual learning
and stuff. They had one of the most
interesting like two sentences in a blog
post, which is that they had their new
composer model, which was a fine-tune of
one of these large mixture of expert
models from China. You can know that
by asking Gossip or because the model
sometimes responds in Chinese, which
none of the American models do. And they
had a blog post where they're like,
"We're updating the model weights every
90 minutes based on real-world feedback
from people using it." Which is like the
closest thing to real-world RL happening
on a model. And it's just like in one of
their blog posts, which is super cool.
>> And I And by the way, I just I say I use
Composer a lot cuz it's one one of the
benefits that it has is it's fast.
>> I need to try it cuz everybody says
this.
>> And there'll be some IPOs potentially.
You think Anthropic, OpenAI,
xAI?
>> They can all raise so much money
so easily that they don't feel a need to
Like, so long as fundraising is easy,
they're not going to IPO because public
markets apply pressure. I think we're
seeing in China that the ecosystem's a
little different with both MiniMax and Z
dot AI
applying for um filing IPO paperwork,
which will be interesting to see how the
Chinese market reacts. I actually would
guess that it's going to be like
similarly hypey to the US so so long as
all this is going and not based in the
realities that they're both losing a ton
of money.
I wish more of the American gigantic AI
startups were public because it would be
very interesting to see how they're
spending their money and have more
insight. And also just to give
people access to investing in these cuz
I think that they're some of the most
like
formative they're the
companies of the era. And the tradition
is now for so many of the big startups
in the US to not go public. It's like
we're still waiting for Stripe and the
IPO, but Databricks definitely didn't.
They raised like a series G
or something. And I just feel like it's
a kind of a weird equilibrium for the
market where it's like
I would like to see these companies go
public and
evolve in that way that a company can.
>> You think 10 years from now some of the
frontier model companies are still
around? Anthropic, OpenAI?
>> I definitely don't see it to be a winner
takes all unless there truly is some
algorithmic secret that one of them
finds like this is flywheel cuz the
development path is so similar for all
of them. Google and OpenAI have like all
the same products and then
like Anthropic's more focused, but when
you talk to people it sounds like
they're solving a lot of the same
problems. So I think and there's
offerings that will spread out. There's
a lot of it's a very big cake that's
being made that people are going to take
money out of.
>> I don't want to trivialize it, but
so OpenAI and Anthropic are primarily
LLM
service providers and some of the other
companies like Google and
xAI linked to X
does other stuff, too.
And so it's very possible if AI becomes
more commoditized
that the companies that are just
providing LLM
will die.
>> I think they will the advantage they
have they have a lot of users and I
think they will just pivot. I think um
then if they figure out it's like
Anthropic I think pivoted. I don't think
they originally
planned to work on code, but it happened
that they found okay this is like a nice
niche and now we are comfortable in this
niche and we push on this niche and I
can see the same thing once maybe let's
say hypothetically speaking I I'm not
sure if it will be true, but let's say
Google takes all the market share of the
general chatbot. Maybe OpenAI will be
then
focus on some other sub topic like the
have too many users to
go away in foreseeable future, I think.
>> I think Google is always ready to say
hold my beer with the AI mode.
>> I think that the question is if the
companies can support the valuations. I
think I'd see the AI companies being
looked at in some ways like AWS Azure
and GCP are all competing in the same
space and all very successful
businesses. There's a chance that the
API market is so unprofitable that
they go up and down the stack to
products and hardware. They have so much
cash that they can build power plants
and build data centers, which is a
durable advantage now.
But there's also just a reasonable
outcome that these APIs are so valuable
and so flexible for developers that they
become the likes of like a something
like AWS. But AWS and Azure also going
to have these APIs, so there's some like
that's a
like five or six people competing in the
API market is hard. So maybe like that's
why they get squeezed out.
>> You mentioned RIP llama.
Is there a path to winning for Meta?
>> I think nobody knows. They're
moving a lot. So they're signing
licensing deals with
um Black Forest Labs, which is an image
generation or mid-journey or acquiring
minus. So I think in some ways it's on
the product and like consumer-facing AI
front, it's too early to tell.
I think they have some people that are
excellent and very motivated being close
to Zuckerberg. So I think that there's
still a story to unfold there.
Llama is a bit different where
Llama was the
most focused expression of the
organization and I don't see Llama being
um supported to that extent. I think it
was a very successful brand for them, so
they still might do some part of
participation in the open open ecosystem
or continue the llama brand into a
different service because people know
what llama is.
>> Do you think there's a llama 5?
>> Not an open weight one.
>> It's interesting. I think also just to
recap a bit. I think I mean llama was
the I would say pioneering open weight
model and then llama 1 2 3 a lot of love
but I think then I think what happened
just hypothesizing or speculating I
think the
leaders at meta like the upper
executives they I think they got really
excited about llama because they saw how
popular it was in the community and then
I think the problem was trying to let's
say monetize the open not monetize the
open source but like kind of use the
open source to make a bigger splash in a
like to kind of force it almost it felt
forced like developing these very big
llama four models to
have like the best like to be on the top
of the benchmarks but I don't think the
goal of llama models is to be on top of
the benchmarks beating let's say chat
GPT or other models. I think the goal
was to have a model that people can use
trust modify understand it so that
includes having smaller models. They
don't have to be the best models and
what happened was just these models were
of course like the benchmarks
suggested they were better than they
were by because I think they had like
specific models trained on preferences
that they performed well on the
benchmarks it's kind of like this over
fitting thing to kind of force it to be
the best but then at the same time
they didn't do the small models that
people could use I I think that no one
could run these big models then and then
there was kind of like a weird thing and
I think it's just because people got too
excited about
headlines pushing the frontier I think I
think
>> And too much like on the benchmarking
side.
>> Yeah yeah I think I think it imploded
under political
like internal political fighting and
misaligned incentives so like the
researchers want to build the best
models but there's a layer of
organization and manager that is trying
to demonstrate that they do these things
and then there's lots of
there's a lot of pieces and rumors where
how like some horrible technical
decision was made and how that comes in
and it just seems like
it kind of got too bad where it all just
crashed out.
>> we we should we should also like give
huge props to Mark Zuckerberg.
I think it comes from Mark actually.
From Mark Zuckerberg from the top of the
leadership saying open source is
important. I think that's like that if
the the fact that that exists means
there could be a llama five where they
learn the lessons from the bench maxing
and say we're going to be GPT-4
and provide really awesome
library of open source.
>> What people say is that there's a debate
between Mark and Alexander Wang who is
very bright but much more against open
source and to the extent that he has a
lot of influence over the AI org it
seems much less likely because it seems
like Mark brought him in for like a
fresh um leadership aid in directing AI
and if the like open or closed is no
longer the defining nature of the model
I don't expect that to be a defining
argument between Mark and Alex. So like
they're both very bright but I just like
I have a hard time understanding all of
it because Mark wrote this piece in July
of
maybe which was like probably the best
blog post at the time saying the case
for open source AI and then July 2025
came around and it was like we're
reevaluating our relationship open
source. So it's just kind of like
>> But I think also the the problem not the
problem but I think well we may have
been a bit also too harsh I think and
that caused some of that because I think
I mean we as open source developers or
the open source community because I
think
even though the model was maybe not what
everyone hoped for it got a lot of
backlash and I think that was a bit
unfortunate because I can see that as a
company now they were hoping for
positive headlines and
uh
instead of just getting no headlines or
not these positive headlines on in in
turn they got negative headlines. And
then all it kind of reflected bad on the
company, and I think that is also
something like where you is maybe a
spite reaction almost like, "Okay, we
have now we we tried to do something
nice. We tried to gave give you
something cool like an open-source
model, and now you are like, you know,
kind of like being negative about us
even like like for the company." So, in
that sense it looks like, "Well, maybe
then we'll change our mind, I guess. I
don't know."
>> Yeah, that's that's where the
uh the dynamics of discourse on X can
lead us as a community astray cuz
sometimes it feels random people pick
the thing they like and don't like.
And you can see the same thing with Grok
uh 4 1 and Grok Code Fast 1.
I don't think vibe-wise people
um
love it publicly, mhm, but a lot of
people use it.
So, if you look to Reddit and X, they
don't really give it praise from the
programming community, but like they use
it. And the same thing with probably
with Llama. I don't understand I don't
understand the dynamics of either
positive hype or negative hype. I don't
understand it.
>> I mean, the story of one of the stories
in 2025 is the US
filling the gap of Llama, which is like
all the rise of these Chinese
open-weight models to the point where
I'm like, "That was the single issue
I've spent a lot of energy on the last 5
months is like trying to do policy work
to get the US to invest in this." It's
like
>> So, tell me the story of Adam.
>> Adam Project is it started as me calling
it the American Deep Seek Project, which
doesn't really work for DC audiences,
but it's the story of like what is the
most impactful thing I could do with my
career, which is that with these Chinese
open-weight models are cultivating a lot
of power, and there is a lot of demand
for building on these open models,
especially in enterprises in the US that
are very cagey about these Chinese
models.
>> Going to perplexity, the Atom project,
American truly open models is a US-based
initiative to build and host
high-quality, genuinely open-weight AI
models and supporting infrastructure
explicitly aimed at competing with and
catching up to China's rapidly advancing
open-source AI ecosystem.
>> I think the one-sentence summary would
be that or two sentences. One is a
proposition that open models are going
to be an engine for AI research because
that is what people start with.
Therefore, it's important to own them.
And the second one is
therefore, the US should be building the
best models so that the best researcher
happens in the US and the US companies
take the value from being the home of
where AI research is happening. And
without more investment in open models,
we have all the plots on the website
where it's like, "Quinn, Quinn, Quinn."
And it's all these models that are
excellent from these Chinese companies
that are
cultivating influence in the US and
China and internationally. And I think
the US is spending way more on AI and
the ability to create open models that
are half a generation or a generation
beyond what the cutting edge of the
closed labs is costs orders of like
hundred million dollars, which is a lot
of money, but not a lot of the money to
these companies. So, therefore, we need
a centralizing force of people who want
to do this. And I think
we got signed in engagement from people
pretty much across the full stack,
whether it's policy.
>> So, there has been support from the
administration?
>> I don't think anyone in that like
technically in government has
like signed it publicly, but I know that
people that worked in AI policy both in
Biden and Trump administration are very
supportive of trying to promote
open-source models in the US. I think,
for example, AI2 got a
grant from the NSF for a hundred million
dollars over four years, which is like
the biggest CS grant the NSF has ever
awarded and it's for the AI2 to attempt
to this and I think it's a starting
point. But the best thing happens when
there are multiple organizations
building models because they can
cross-pollinate ideas and kind of build
this ecosystem. Like I don't think if it
just works if it's just Llama releasing
models to the world because then you can
see Llama can go away. The same thing
applies for AI2 where it's like I can't
be the only one building models.
And I think that it's like
that
it becomes a lot of time spent on
talking to people whether they're in
policy.
I know Nvidia is very excited about
this. I think Jensen Huang has been
specifically talking about the urgency
for this and they've changed they've
done a lot more in 2025 where the
Nemotron models are more of a focus.
They've started releasing some data
along with Nvidia's open models and like
very few companies do this especially of
Nvidia's size. So like there is there is
signs of progress and there we hear
about Reflection AI where they say their
2 billion dollar fundraise is dedicated
to building US open models and I feel
like their announcement tweet is like it
reads like a blog post all right and I
think that that
cultural tide is starting to
turn. I think in in July was when we had
like
four or five deep seat caliber Chinese
open weight models and zero from the US.
And that's that's the moment where was
released this and I was like I guess I
have to spend energy on this cuz nobody
else is going to do it. So it takes a
lot of it takes a lot of people
contributing together and I don't say
that like the Adam project isn't like
the thing that's helping to move the
ecosystem, but it's people like me doing
this sort of thing to get the word out.
>> Uh do you like the the 2025 America's AI
action plan that includes open source
stuff? The White House AI action plan
includes a dedicated section titled to
encourage open source and open weight AI
defining such models and arguing they
have unique value for innovation and
startups.
>> Yeah, I mean like the AI action plan is
a plan, but
largely I think it's like
maybe the most coherent policy document
that has come out of the administration
and I hope that it largely succeeds and
I know people that have worked on the AI
action plan and the challenge is
taking policy and making it real and I
have no idea how to do this as an AI
researcher, but like like largely a lot
of things in that were very real and
there's a huge build out of AI in the
country and it's like there are a lot of
issues that people are hearing about
from water use to whatever and like we
should be able to build things in this
country, but also we need to
not ruin places in our country in the
process of building it and
it's a worthwhile to spend energy on and
I think that's a role that the federal
government plays is like they set the
agenda and with AI setting the agenda
that open weight should be a
first consideration is like that's a
large part of what they can do and then
people think about it.
>> Also for education and talent for these
companies it's I think very important
because otherwise you know if they're
only closed um
models, how do you get the next
generation of people contributing at
some point because otherwise you will at
some point
only be able to learn after you joined a
company, but then at that point like how
do you hire talented people? How do you
identify talented people? And I think
open source is
let's say even for a lot of things, but
also even just for educating the
population and training the next
generation of researchers it's the way
or the only way.
>> The way that I could have gotten this to
more go more viral is was to tell a
story of Chinese AI integrating with an
authoritarian state and being ASI and
taking over the world and therefore we
need our own American models, but it's
very intentional for why I talk about
innovation and science in the US because
I think it's
both more realistic as an outcome, but
just like it's like it's a world that is
that I would like to manifest.
>> I would say though also even like let's
say any open weight model I do think is
a valuable model.
>> Yeah, and my argument is that we should
be in a leading position. But I think
that it's
worth saying it so simply because there
are still voices in the AI ecosystem
that say we should consider banning
releasing open models due to the safety
risks. And I think it's worth adding
that
I think effectively that's impossible
without making the US like it have its
own great firewall, which is also known
to not
um work that well because the cost for
training these models whether it's 1 to
100 million dollars is attainable to a
huge amount of
people in the world that want to have
influence. So these models will be
getting trained all over the world and
these we want the models especially with
like
I mean there are safety concerns, but we
want these information and tools to flow
freely across the world and into the US
so that we people can use them and learn
from them. And we like stopping that
would be such a restructuring of our
internet that it seems impossible.
>> Do you think maybe in that case the big
open weight models from China are
actually a good thing in a sense like
for the US companies because maybe the
US companies you mentioned earlier they
are usually one generation behind in
terms of what they release open source
versus what they are using for example
GPT- as might not be the cutting edge
model Gemma 3 might not be.
Um but they do that because they know
this is safe to release. But then when
they see these companies see for example
there is Deep Seek version 3.2 which is
really awesome and it gets used and
there is no backlash there is no
security risk that could then again
encourage them to release better models.
Maybe that that in a sense is a very
positive thing.
>> 100% These Chinese companies have set
things into motion that I think would
potentially not have happened if they
were not all releasing models. So I
think this like
>> Mhm.
>> that I'm
almost sure that those discussions have
been had by leadership.
>> Is there a possible future where the
dominant models, AI models in the world,
are all open source?
>> Depends on the trajectory of progress
that you predict. If you think
saturation in progress is even coming
within a few years, so essentially
within the time where financial support
is still very good, then open models
will be so optimized and so much cheaper
to run that they will win out.
Essentially, this goes back to
open-source ideas where so many more
people will be putting money into
optimizing the serving of these
open-weight common architectures that
they will become standards. And then you
could have chips dedicated to them, and
it'll be way cheaper than the um
offerings from these closed companies
that are custom.
>> We should say that AI 27 report kind of
predicts, one of the things it does from
a narrative perspective, is that
there'll be a lot of centralization as
the AI system gets smarter and smarter,
the national security concerns will come
to be, and you'll centralize the labs,
and you'll become super secretive, and
there'll be this whole race from
military perspective of how to you
between China and the United States. And
so all of these fun conversations we're
having about LLMs,
all the generals, the soldiers will come
into their own and be like, "All right,
we're now in the Manhattan Project stage
of this whole thing."
>> I think 2025, 6, 7, 27, I don't think
something like that is even remotely
possible. I mean, you can make the same
argument for computers, right? You can
say, "Okay, computers are capable, and
we don't want the general public to get
them." Or
chips, even AI chips, but you see how
like, you know, Huawei makes chips now,
you know, took a few years, but and I
think that I don't think there is a way
you can contain something like that,
like knowledge like that. I I I think in
this day and age it is impossible. Like
the internet,
I don't think this is a possibility.
>> On the Manhattan Project thing, one of
my funny things making Adam is I think
that like a Manhattan Project like thing
for open models would actually be pretty
reasonable cuz it wouldn't cost that
much, but I think that that will come
from the It seems like culturally the
companies are changing, but I agree with
Sebastian and all of the stuff that you
just said. It's just like
I don't
see it happening nor being helpful.
>> Yeah, I mean the the motivating force
behind the Manhattan Project is there is
civilizational risk. I don't I It's hard
to motivate that for open-source models.
>> There's not civilizational risk.
>> Uh you think on the hardware side we
mentioned Nvidia a bunch of times. Do
you think Jensen and Nvidia are going to
keep winning?
>> I think they have the downside that they
have to iterate a lot and manufacture a
lot and I think they probably
what what they're doing
they do innovate, but um I think there's
always the chance that there is
something who does something
fundamentally different who gets very
lucky and then
does something, but the problem is I
think adoption. You know, like the the
mode of Nvidia is probably not just the
GPU, it's more like the CUDA ecosystem
and that has evolved over so many I mean
two decades. I think I mean even back
when I was a grad student we I was in a
lab we did biophysical simulations,
molecular dynamics, and we had a Tesla
GPU back then just for the computation.
It was
I mean 15 years ago now. And just they
built this up for a long time and that's
like that's the mode I think. It's not
the the chip itself although they have
now the money to iterate and build and
scale, but then it's really on the
compatibility. It's like well, if you at
that scale as a company, why would you
go with something risky where it's only
a few chips that they can make per year
you go with a big one, but then
I do think with LLMs now also it will be
easier to design something like CUDA.
You know, like the next So, it took Took
years because it's hard, but then now we
have LLM so we can maybe replicate CUDA.
>> And I wonder if there'll be a separation
of the training and the inference
compute. As we kind of stabilize a bit
more and more and more
uh compute is needed for inference.
>> Mhm. That's supposed to be the point of
the Groq acquisition. And And that's why
part of what Vera Rubin is where they
have a new chip with no high bandwidth
memory, which is one of the or very
little, which is one of the most
expensive pieces. It's designed for
prefill, which is the part of inference
where
you essentially do a lot of matrix
multiplications, and then you only need
the memory when you're doing this auto
regressive generation and you have the
KV cache swaps. So, they have this new
GPU that's designed for that specific
use case, and then the cost of ownership
for
per flop or whatever is actually way
lower.
But I I think that
Nvidia's fate lies in the diffusion of
AI still. Their biggest clients are
still these hyperscale companies,
whether it's like Google obviously can
make TPUs. Amazon is making Trainium.
Microsoft will try to do its own things.
And like
so long as the pace of AI progress is
high, Nvidia's platform is the most
flexible and people will want that. But
if there's stagnation, then
creating bespoke chips, there's more
time to do it.
>> It's interesting that Nvidia's is quite
active in trying to develop all kinds of
different products.
>> They tried to create
areas of commercial value that will use
a lot of GPUs.
>> But they keep innovating and and there
there's a lot like they're doing a lot
of incredible research, so.
>> Everyone says that the company is super
oriented around Jensen and how
operationally plugged in he is. And it
sounds so unlike many other big
companies that I've heard about. And so
long as that's the culture, I think that
I will expect them to keep progress
happening. And it's like he's still in
the Steve Jobs era of Apple. So long as
that is how it operates, I'm pretty
optimistic for their situation because
it's like
it is their top order problem and I
don't know if making these chips for the
whole ecosystem is the top goal of all
these other companies. They'll do a good
job, but it might not be it as good of a
job.
>> Since you mentioned Jensen, I've been um
reading a lot about history and about
singular figures in history. What do you
guys think about
the single man woman view of history?
How important are individuals for
steering the direction of history in the
tech sector? So
you know, what's Nvidia without Jensen?
You mentioned Steve Jobs, what's Apple
without Steve Jobs? What's xAI
without Elon?
Or DeepMind without Demis?
>> People make things earlier and faster
where scientifically
many great scientists credit to being
the right place at the right time and
still making the innovation where
eventually someone else will still have
the idea. So I think that
in that way
Jensen is helping manifest this GPU
revolution much faster and much more
focused than without having a person
there it would do. And this is making
the whole AI build out faster. But I do
still think that eventually
like something like ChatGPT would have
happened and a build out like this would
have happened, but it probably would not
have been
as fast or like as like I think that's
the sort of flavor that is applied.
>> People these individual people are
placing bets on something. Some get
lucky, some don't. But if you don't have
these people at the helm, it would be
more too diffuse. It's almost like
investing in a ETF versus individual
stocks. Individual stocks
might go up, might go down more heavily
than an ETF which is more balanced. It
will eventually go up over time. We'll
get there. But it's just like you know,
like
focus I think is the thing. Passionate
focus.
>> Isn't there a real case to be made that
without Jensen, there's not a uh
reinvigoration of the deep learning
revolution.
>> It could have been 20 years later is the
thing that I would say.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah, 20
>> another AI winter like a deep learning
winter could have come.
>> Yeah.
>> If GPUs weren't around.
>> That could change history completely cuz
you could think of all the other
technologies that
that could have come in the meantime and
the focus of human civilization could
the Silicon Valley would be captured by
different hype.
>> But I do think that this I mean there's
certainly an aspect where it was all
planned the GPU trajectory but on the
other end it's also a lot of lucky
coincidences. For example, or good
intuition like the investment into this
let's say biophysical simulations or
like I mean I think it started with
video games and then it just happened to
be good at linear algebra because video
games require a lot of linear algebra
and then you have the biophysical um
simulations and then but still I don't
think the plan the master plan was AI. I
think there was just it happened to be
Alex Krizhevsky. So someone took these
GPUs and like hey let's try to train a
neural network on that it happened to
work really well and I think it only
happened because you could purchase
those GPUs.
>> Gaming would have created a demand for
faster processors if Nvidia had got out
of business in the early days.
>> Mhm.
>> That's what I would think like I think
that
the GPUs would have been different for
the Alex but I think like GPUs would
still exist at the time of AlexNet and
at the time of the transformer.
It was just hard to know if it would be
one company as successful or multiple
smaller companies with worse
chips but I don't think that's like a
100 year delay. It might be a decade
delay.
>> Well, it could be one, two, three, four,
five decade delay. I mean I just can't
see Intel or AMD doing what Nvidia did.
>> it would be a company that exists. I
think it would be a different company
would rise.
>> Silicon Graphics or something.
>> So yeah, some company that has died
would have done it.
>> But it does like just look looking at
it, it seems like these singular
figures, these leaders have a huge
impact
on the trajectory of the world.
Obviously, incredible teams behind them.
But, you know, having that kind of
very singular, almost dogmatic focus
is necessary to make progress.
>> Yeah, I mean I mean even with GPT, it
wouldn't exist if there wasn't a person,
Ilya, who pushed for this scaling,
right?
>> Yeah, Dario was also deeply involved in
that. You read some of the histories of
OpenAI. It almost seems wild thinking
about how early these people were like,
"We need to hook up 10,000 GPUs and take
all of OpenAI's compute and train one
model."
There's a lot of people there that
didn't want to do that.
>> Which is an insane thing to believe that
to believe scaling before scaling has
any indication that it's going to
materialize. Again, singular figures.
Speaking of which,
40 years from now,
this is presumably post-singularity,
whatever singularity is,
when uh historians look back at our time
now,
what technological
breakthroughs would they really
emphasize as the breakthroughs that led
to the singularity? So, so far we have
Turing to today, 80 years.
>> I think it would still be computing,
like the umbrella term computing. Just I
don't necessarily think it's even like
100 years, 200 years from now it would
be AI. It would still
be still well be computers, you know?
Just we are now taking better advantage
of computers, but like the fact of
computing.
>> It's a basically Moore's law kind of
discussion. You're not even the details
of code and GPUs won't even be
remembered. And it won't be all this
software turmoil. It'll be just
obviously compute.
>> generally agree, but it's like is the
connectivity of the internet and compute
able to be merged or is that both of
them?
>> I think the internet will probably
related to yeah, I mean communication
that it could be a phone internet or
satellite that stuff.
Where yeah, and computer is that more
like the scaling aspect of it.
>> It's possible that the internet has
completely forgotten. The internet is
wrapped into the phone networks like
communication networks.
This is it just another manifestation of
that and the real breakthrough comes
from the just the increased compute is
the Moore's law broadly defined.
>> Well, I think that connection of people
is very fundamental to it. So it's like
you can talk to any
want to find the best person in the
world for something there somewhere in
the world and being able to have that
flow of information. The AI's will also
rely on this. I think I've been fixating
on the like the when I said the dream
was dead about the one central model and
the thing that is evolving is like
people have many agents for different
tasks. People are start doing this with
different clouds for different tasks and
it's described as many AGIs in the data
center where each one manages and they
talk to each other and I
that is very so reliant on networking
and free flow of information on top of
compute but like networking especially
with GPUs is such a part of scaling up
compute. Like the GPUs in the data
centers need to talk to each other.
>> Anything about neural networks will be
remembered? Do you think there's
something very
specific and singular to the fact that
it's neural networks that seen as a
breakthrough like a genius that you're
basically replicating in a very crude
way the human mind?
The structure the structure of the human
brain the human mind.
>> I think without the human mind we
probably wouldn't have neural networks
because it just was an inspiration for
that. But at the other end I think it's
just so so different. I mean it's
digital versus you know biological that.
I do think it will probably be more like
grouped as an algorithm.
>> That's massively parallelizable on this
particular kind of compute.
>> Could have been well been like genetic
computing, like genetic genetic
algorithms just as parallelized as
thing. It just happens that this is more
efficient, works better, you know.
>> And it very well could be that the LM,
you know, the neural networks, the way
we
architect them now is just a small
component of the
system that leads to singularity.
>> I think it's if you think of it in 100
years, like
society I think can be changed more with
more compute and intelligence because of
autonomy, but it's like looking at
looking at this, like what are the
things from the Industrial Revolution
that we remember? We remember like the
engine is probably the equivalent of the
computer in this.
But there's a lot of other like physical
transformations that people are aware
of, like like all the
like the cotton gin and all these things
that these
machines that are still known, air
conditioning, refrigerators, like
some of these things from AI will still
be known. Like the word transformer
could still very well be known. I would
guess that deep learning is definitely
still learn known, but the transformer
might be evolved away from in 100 years
of
with
ASI AI researchers everywhere.
But I I think deep learning is
likely to be a term that is remembered.
>> And I wonder what the air conditioning
and the refrigeration of the future is
that AI brings. Is there if we travel
forward 100 years from now, we'll
transport there right now. What do you
think is different? How do you think the
world looks different?
First of all, you think there's humans?
You think there's robots everywhere
walking around?
>> I do think specialized robots for sure,
for certain tasks.
>> Humanoid form?
>> Um that I'm maybe half humanoid.
We'll see. I think for certain things,
yes, uh there will be humanoid robots
because it's just amenable for the
environment. But I like for certain
tasks, it might make sense. What's
harder to imagine is how we interact
with devices and what humans do with
devices. Well, I mean, I'm pretty sure
it will probably not be the cell phone.
It will probably not be the laptop. Will
it be, you know, implants?
>> I mean, it has to be brain computer
interfaces, right? I mean, 100 years
from now it has to like given the
progress we're seeing now, there has to
be unless there's legitimately
complete
alteration of how we interact with the
reality.
>> On the other hand, if you think of cars,
cars are older than 100 years, right?
And it's still the same interface. It's
not We haven't replaced cars with
something else. We just made the cars
better, but it's still steering wheel,
it's still wheels, you know.
>> I think we'll still carry around a
physical brick of compute because people
want some ability to have a
private Like you might not engage with
it as much as a phone, but having
something where you can have private
information that is yours as an
interface between the rest of the
internet. I think is something that
people will still exist. It might not
look like an iPhone, and it might be
used a lot less, but I still expect to
have people carry things around.
>> Why do you think the smartphone is the
embodiment of private?
There's a camera on it.
>> Um
>> Private for you, like encrypted
messages, encrypted photos, you know
what your life is. Like
I guess this is the question on what how
optimistic on brain machine interfaces
you are.
If is all of that just going to be
stored in the cloud and your whole
calendar Like it
it's hard to think about processing all
the information that we can process
visually through brain machine
interfaces presenting something like a
calendar or something to you. Like it's
hard to just think about knowing
without looking, you know your email
inbox. Like you signal to it a computer
and then you just know your email inbox.
Like what does that Like is that
something that the human brain can
handle being piped into it non-visually.
Like I I don't know exactly how those
transformations happen cuz humans aren't
changing in 100 years. I think agency
and community are things that people
actually want.
>> Local community, yeah.
>> So like people you are close to, being
able to do things with them, and being
able to
ascribe mean like describe meaning to
your life and be able to do things. I
think that that is maybe if not in 100
years, I don't think that human biology
is changing away from those on a time
scale that we can discuss, and I think
that
like UBI does not solve agency. I do
expect
mass wealth, and I hope that it is
spread so that the average life does
look very different in 100 years, but
that's still a lot to happen in 100
years if you think about countries that
are early in their development process
to getting access to computing and
internet, like to build all the
infrastructure and to have
policy that shares one nation's wealth
with another is
it's I think it's an optimistic view to
see all that happening in 100 years
while they still being while they are
still independent entities and not just
like absorbed into some international
order by force.
>> But there could be just better, more
elaborate, more effective
social support systems that help
alleviate some levels of basic suffering
from the world. You know, the
transformation of society where a lot of
jobs are lost in the short term. I think
we have to really remember that each
individual job that's lost
is a is a human being who's suffering.
That's like a
when jobs are lost at scale is a real
tragedy.
You can make all kinds of arguments
about economics or it's it's all going
to be okay. It's
it's good for the GDP. There's going to
be new jobs created.
Fundamentally at the individual level
for that human being, that's that's real
suffering.
That's a real personal sort of tragedy,
and we have to not forget that as the
technologies are being developed.
And also, my my hope for all the AI slop
we're seeing
is that there'll be a greater and
greater premium for the
the fundamentals
aspects of the human experience that are
like in person.
The things that we all
like seeing each other, talking
together, in person.
>> The next few years are definitely going
to be an increased value on
physical goods and events, and then even
more pressure on slop.
>> Mhm.
>> So, there'll be so they'll they'll keep
the slop is only starting. The next few
years will be more and more diverse
versions of slop.
>> slop? We'd be drowning in slop as a
>> that we society drowns in slop enough to
snap out of it and be like, we can't.
Like, none. Like, it just doesn't
matter. We all can't deal with it. And
then like, the physical has such a
higher premium on it.
>> Even like,
classic examples, I honestly think this
is true, and I think we'll get tired of
it. We are already kind of tired of it.
Same with I mean, even art. I don't
think art will go away.
I mean, you have paintings, physical
paintings.
There's more value, not just monetary
value, but just more value appreciation
for something that is the actual
painting than a photocopy of that
painting. It could be a perfect digital
reprint of that, but there's something
when you go to museum and you look at
that art and you see that real thing and
you just think about, okay, a human I
don't know. It's like a craft you have
like appreciation for that, and I think
the same is true for writing, for
talking, for any type of experience
where it will be I do unfortunately
think it will be like a dichotomy like,
it will be like a fork where
well, some things will be automated
like, you know, there are not as many
paintings as they used to be
200 years ago. There are more more
photographs, more photocopies.
But, at the same time it won't go away.
There will be a, you know, value in
that. I think that the difference will
just be a bit, you know, what's the
proportion of that. But,
personally, I I have a hard time reading
things where I obviously see it's um
obviously AI-generated. I'm
like sorry, it might be really good
information there, but I have like a
certain nah, not for me.
>> I think eventually they'll fool you and
it'll be on platforms that give ways of
verifying or building trust. So, you
will trust that Lex is not AI-generated
having been here. So, then you have
trust in this channel. But, it's harder
for new people that don't have that
trust.
>> Well, that that will be get interesting
because I think fundamentally I think
it's a solvable problem by having, you
know,
trust in certain outlets that they won't
do it, but it's all going to be kind of
trust-based. There will be some systems
to authorize, okay, this is a real, this
is not real. There will be some telltale
telltale signs where you can obviously
tell this is AI-generated and this is
not, but they won't I mean, some will be
so good that it's hard to tell and then
you have to trust and well, that that
will get interesting and a bit
problematic.
>> The extreme case of this is to watermark
all human content.
>> Mhm.
>> So, all photos that we take on our own
have some watermark until they're edited
or something like this and software can
manage communications with the
device manufacturer to maintain like
human editing.
Which is the opposite of the discussion
to try to watermark AI images and then
you can make a Google image that has a
watermark and use a different Google
tool to remove the watermark.
>> yeah, it's going to be a arms race
basically. Yeah, yeah.
>> Uh and we've been mostly focusing on the
positive aspects of AI. I mean, there's
also the the
all the capabilities we've been talking
about can be used to destabilize human
civilization
with even just
relatively dumb AI
applied at scale and then further and
further super intelligent AI systems. Of
course, there's the the sort of doomer
take
that's important to consider a little
bit as we develop these technologies.
Um, what gives you hope about the future
of human civilization? Everything we've
been talking about.
Are we going to be okay?
>> I think we will we will. I'm I'm
definitely a warrior but about AI and
non-AI things, but
um, humans do tend to find a way. I
think that's what humans are built for
is to have community and find a way to
figure out problems and that's what has
gotten us to this point. And I think
that
the AI opportunity and related
technologies is really big and I think
that
there's big social and political
problems to
help everybody understand that. And I
think that that's what we're staring at
a lot of right now is like the world is
a scary place and AI is a very uncertain
thing.
And it takes a lot of work that is
not necessarily building things. It's
like telling people and understanding
people that the people building AI are
historically not motivated or wanting to
do that.
It is something that is probably doable.
It just will take longer than people
want. We have to go through that long
period of like hard
distraught AI discussions if we want to
have the lasting benefits.
>> Yeah, through that process I'm
especially excited that we get a chance
uh, to better understand ourselves.
Also at the individual level as humans
and at the civilizational level.
Yeah, there's some of the big mysteries.
Like, what is this whole like
consciousness thing going on here?
Seems to be truly special. Like, there's
a real miracle in our mind.
And AI puts a mirror to ourselves and
get to
answer some of the big questions about
like what what is this whole thing going
on here?
>> Well, one thing about that is also what
I do think makes us very different from
AI and why I don't worry about AI taking
over is
like you said consciousness. We humans,
we decide what we want to do. AI in its
current implementation I can't see it
changing. You have to tell it what to
do. And so
you have still the agency. It doesn't
take the agency from you because you
have to
becomes a tool. You can think of it as a
tool. You tell it what to do. It will be
more
automatic than other previous tools.
It's certainly more powerful than a
hammer. It can figure things out, but
it's still you in in in charge, right?
So the AI is not in charge. You're in
charge. You tell the AI what to do and
it's doing it for you.
>> So in a post-singularity
post-apocalyptic
war between humans and machines, you're
saying humans are worth fighting for.
>> 100% I mean
This is the movie Terminator they made
in the '80s essentially and I do think
Well,
the only thing I can see going wrong is
of course if things are explicitly
programmed to do the thing that is
harmful basically.
>> I think actually in that in a Terminator
type of setup, I think humans win.
>> Mhm.
>> I think we're too clever.
Um it's hard to explain how we figure it
out, but we do.
And we'll probably be using local LLMs,
open-source LLMs to help fight the
machines.
Um I apologize for the ridiculousness.
Like I said, Nathan already knows I've
been a a big fan of his for a long time.
Been a a big fan of yours Sebastian for
a long time. So it's an honor to finally
meet you. Uh thank you for everything
you put out into the world. Thank you
for the excellent books you're writing.
Thank you for teaching us.
Uh and thank you for talking today. This
was fun.
>> Thank you for inviting us here and
having this human connection
which is actually
>> extremely valuable human connection.
>> Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Sebastian Raschka and
Nathan Lambert. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the
description where you can also find
links to contact me, ask questions, give
feedback, and so on.
And now, let me leave you with some
words from Albert Einstein.
It is not that I'm so smart,
but I stay with the questions much
longer.
Thank you for listening and hope to see
you next time.